WHY ZEBRAS DON'T GET ULCERS
Third Edition
ROBERT M. SAPOLSKY
Copyright © 1994,1998 by W. H. Freeman, and 2004 by Robert M. Sapolsky
ISBN:9780805073690 
For Lisa, my best friend, who has made my life complete
CONTENTS
Preface xi 1 Why Don't Zebras Get Ulcers? 1 2 Glands, Gooseflesh, and Hormones 19 3 Stroke, 
Heart Attacks, and Voodoo Death 37 4 Stress, Metabolism, and Liquidating Your Assets 57 5 
Ulcers, the Runs, and Hot Fudge Sundaes 71 6 Dwarfism and the Importance of Mothers 92
7 Sex and Reproduction 1208 Immunity, Stress, and Disease 144
9 Stress and Pain 186
10 Stress and Memory 20211 Stress and a Good Night's Sleep 226Page 1 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm12 Aging and Death 239
13 Why Is Psychological Stress Stressful? 252
14 Stress and Depression 271
15 Personality, Temperament, andTheir Stress-Related Consequences 30916 Junkies, Adrenaline Junkies, and Pleasure 335
17 The View from the Bottom 353
18 Managing Stress 384Notes 419Illustration Credits 517
Index 521
PREFACE
Perhaps you're reading this while browsing in a bookstore. If so, glance over at the guy down the aisle when he's not 
looking, the one pretending to be engrossed in the Stephen Hawking book. Take a good look at him. He's probably not 
missing fingers from leprosy, or covered with smallpox scar s, or shivering with malaria.  Instead, he probably appears 
perfectly healthy, which is to say he has the same diseases th at most of us have—cholesterol levels that are high for an 
ape, hearing that has become far less acute  than in a hunter-gatherer of his age, a tendency to dampen his tension with 
Valium. We in our Western society now tend to get different diseases than we used to. But what's more important, we 
tend to get different kinds of diseases now, with very different causes and consequences. A millennium ago, a young 
hunter-gatherer inadvertently would eat a reedbuck riddled w ith anthrax and the consequen ces are clear—she's dead a 
few days later. Now, a young lawyer unthinkingly decides that red meat, fried foods, and a couple of beers per dinner 
constitute a desirable diet, and the conseq uences are anything but clear—a half-cen tury later, maybe he's crippled with 
cardiovascular disease, or maybe he's taking bike trips with his grandkids. Which outcome occurs depends on some 
obvious nuts-and-bolts factors, like what his liver does with cholesterol, what levels of certain enzymes are in his fat 
cells, whether he has any congenital weaknesses in the wall s of his blood vessels. But the outcome will also depend 
heavily on such surprising f actors as his personality, the amount of emot ional stress he experiences over the years, 
whether he has someone's shoulder to  cry on when those stressors occur.
There has been a revolution in medicine concerning how we think about the diseases that now afflict us. It involves 
recognizing the
interactions between the body and the mind, the ways in which emotions and personality can have a tremendous 
impact on the functioning and health of virtually every cell in the body. It is about the role of stress in making some of 
us more vulnerable to disease, the wa ys in which some of us cope with stressors, and the critical notion that you 
cannot really understand a disease in vacu o, but rather only in the context of the person suffering from that disease.
This is the subject of my book. I begin by trying to clarify the meaning of the nebulous concept of stress and to teach, 
with a minimum of pain, how various hormones and parts of the brain are mobilized in resp onse to stress. I then focus 
on the links between stress and increased risk for certain types of disease, go ing, chapter by ch apter, through the 
effects of stress on the circulatory syst em, on energy storage, on growth, reproduction, the immune system, and so on. 
Next I describe how the aging process may be influenced by the amount of stress experienced over a lifetime. I then 
examine the link between stress and the most common and arguably most crippling of psychiatric disorders, major 
depression. As part of updating the material for this third edition, I have added two new chapters: one on the 
interactions between stress and sleep, and one on what stress has to do with ad diction. In addition, of the chapters that 
appeared in the previous ed ition, I rewrote about a third to half of the material.
Some of the news in this book is grim—sustained or repeated stress can disrupt our bodies in seemingly endless ways. 
Yet most of us are not incapacitated by stress-related disease. Instead, we cope, both physiologically and 
psychologically, and some of us are spect acularly successful at it. For the reader  who has held on until the end, the 
final chapter reviews what is known about stress management  and how some of its princi ples can be applied to our 
everyday lives. There is mu ch to be optimistic about.Page 2 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmI believe that everyone can benefit from some of these ideas and can be excited by th e science on which they are 
based. Science provides us with some of the most elegant, stim ulating puzzles that life has to  offer. It throws some of 
the most provocative ideas into our arenas  of moral debate. Occasionally, it improv es our lives. I love science, and it 
pains me to think that so many are terrified of the subject  or feel that choosing scien ce means that you cannot also 
choose compassion, or the arts, or be aw ed by nature. Science is not meant to cure us of mystery, but to reinvent and 
reinvigorate it.
Thus I think that any science book for nonscientists should attempt to convey that excitement, to make the subject 
interesting and accessible even to those who would normally not be caught dead  near the
subject. That has been a particular goal  of mine in this book. Often, it has meant simplifying complex ideas, and as a 
counterbalance to this, I include copi ous references at the end of the bo ok, often with annotations concerning 
controversies and subtleties about material presented in th e main text. These references are an excellent entree for 
those readers who want something more detailed on the subject.
Many sections of this book contain material about which I am far from expert, and over the course of the writing, a 
large number of savants have been called for advice, clarification, and verification of facts. I thank them all for their 
generosity with their time and expertise: Nancy Adler, John  Angier, Robert Axelrod, Alan Baldrich, Marcia Barinaga, 
Alan Basbaum, Andrew Baum, Justo Bau tisto, Tom Belva, Anat Biegon, Vic Bo ff (whose brand of vitamins graces 
the cupboards of my parents' home), Carlos Camargo, Ma tt Cartmill, M. Linette Casey, Richard Chapman, Cynthia 
Clinkingbeard, Felix Conte, George Daniels, Regio DeSilva, Irven DeVore, Klaus Dinkel, James Doherty, John 
Dolph, Leroi DuBeck, Richard Estes, Mi chael Fanselow, David Feldman, Caleb Tuck Finch, Paul Fitzgerald, Gerry 
Friedland, Meyer Friedman, Rose Frisch, Roger Gosden, Bob Grossfield, Kenneth Haw-ley, Ray Hintz, Allan 
Hobson, Robert Kessler, Bru ce Knauft, Mary Jeanne Kreek , Stephen Laberge, Emmit Lam, Jim Latcher, Richard 
Lazarus, Helen Leroy, Jon Levine, Seymour Levine, John Li ebeskind, Ted Macolvena, Jo di Maxmin, Michael Miller, 
Peter Milner, Gary Moberg, Anne Moyer, Terry Muilenburg, Ronald Myers, Carol Otis, Daniel Pearl, Ciran Phibbs, 
Jenny Pierce, Ted Pincus, Virginia Price, Gerald Reaven , Sam Ridgeway, Carolyn Ristau , Jeffrey Ritterman, Paul 
Rosch, Ron Rosenfeld, Aryeh Routtenberg, Paul Saenger, Sa ul Schanburg, Kurt Schmidt-Nielson, Carol Shively, J. 
David Singer, Bart Sparagon, David Speigel, Ed Spielman, Dennis Styne, Steve Suomi, Jerry Tally, Carl Thoresen, 
Peter Tyak, David Wake, Michelle Warren, Jay Weiss, Owen Wolkowitz, Carol Worthman, and Richard Wurtman.
I am particularly grateful to the handful of people—friends, collabora tors, colleagues, and ex-teachers—who took 
time out of their immensely busy schedules to read chapters. I shudder to think of the errors and distortions that would 
have remained had they not tactfully told me I didn't kn ow what I was writing about. I thank them all sincerely: 
Robert Ader of the University of Roch ester; Stephen Bezruchka of the University of Washington; Marvin Brown of 
the University of California, San Dieg o; Laurence Frank at the University of  California, Berkeley; Craig Heller of 
Stanford University; Jay Kapl an of Bowman Gray Medical School; Ichiro  Kawachi of Harvard University; George 
Knob of the Scripps Clinic; Charle s Nemeroff of Emory University;
Seymour Reichlin of Tufts/New England Medical Center; Robert Rose of the MacArthur Foundation; Tim Meier of 
Stanford University; Wylie Vale of the Salk Institute; Ja y Weiss of Emory University; and Redford Williams of Duke 
University
A number of people were instrumental in getting this book off the ground and into its final shape. Much of the 
material in these pages was developed in continuing me dical education lectures. Thes e were presented under the 
auspices of the Institute for Cortext Research and Development, and its director, Will Gordon, who gave me much 
freedom and support in exploring this material. Bruce Goldma n of the Portable Stanford series first planted the idea 
for this book in my head, and Kirk Jensen recruited me for W H. Freeman and Company; both helped in the initial 
shaping of the book. Finally, my secretaries, Patsy Gardner an d Lisa Pereira, have been of  tremendous help in all the 
logistical aspects of pulling this book together. I thank you all, and look forward to working with you in the future.
I received tremendous help w ith organizing and editing th e first edition of the book, and for that I thank Audrey 
Herbst, Tina Hastings, Amy Johnson, Meredyth Rawlins, and, above all, my editor, Jonathan Cobb, who was a 
wonderful teacher and friend in this pr ocess. Help in the second  edition came from John Mi chel, Amy Trask, Georgia 
Lee Hadler, Victoria Tomaselli, Bill O' Neal, Kathy Bendo, Paul Rohloff, Jenn ifer MacMillan, and Sheridan Sellers. 
Liz Meryman, who selects the art for Natural History magazine, helping to merge the cu ltures of art and science in 
that beautiful publication, graciously consented to read the manuscript and gave splendid advice on appropriate 
artwork. In addition, I thank Alice Fernandes-Brown, who was responsible for making my  idea for the cover such a 
pleasing reality. In this new edition help came from Rita Quintas, Denise Cronin, Janice O'Quinn, Jessica Firger, and 
Richard Rhorer at Henry Holt.
This book has been, for the most part, a pleasure to write and I think it reflects one of the things in my life for which I 
am most grateful—that I take so much joy in the science th at is both my vocation and avocation. I thank the mentors 
who taught me to do science and, even more so, taught  me to enjoy science: the late Howard Klar, Howard 
Eichenbaum, Mel Konner, Lewis Krey, Bruce McEwen, Paul Plotsky, and Wylie Vale.Page 3 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA band of research assistants have b een indispensable to the writing of th is book. Steve Bait , Roger Chan, Mick 
Markham, Kelley Parker, Michelle Pearl, Sere na Spudich, and Paul Stasi have wandered the basements of archival 
libraries, called strangers all over th e world with questions, distilled arca ne articles into coherency. In the 
line of
duty, they have sought out drawings of opera castrati, the daily menu at Japanese-American internment camps, the 
causes of voodoo death, and the history of firing squads. Al l of their research was done  with spectacular competence, 
speed, and humor. I am fairly certain th is book could not have been completed without their help and am absolutely 
certain its writing would have been much less enjoyable. And finally, I thank my agent, Katinka Matson, and my 
editor, Robin Dennis, who have been just terrific to work with. I look forward to many more years of collaborations 
ahead.
Parts of the book describe work carried out in my own laboratory, and these studies have been made possible by 
funding from the National Institutes of Health, the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Science 
Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, the Klingen-stein Fund, the Alzheimer's Association,  and the Adler Foundation. 
The African fieldwork described herein has been made possible by the long-standing generosity of the Harry Frank 
Guggenheim Foundation. Finally, I heartily thank the MacArthur Foundation for supporting all aspects of my work.
Finally, as will be obvious, this book cites the work of a tremendous number of scientists. Contemporary lab science 
is typically carried out by large teams of people. Throughout the book, I refer to the work of "Jane Doe" or "John 
Smith" for the sake of brevity—it is al most always the case that such work was carried out by Doe or Smith along 
with a band of junior colleagues.
There is a tradition among stress physiologists who dedicate their books to their spouses or significant others, an 
unwritten rule that you are supposed to incorporate somethin g cutesy about stress in the dedication. So, to Madge, 
who attenuates my stressors; for Arturo , the source of my eustress;  for my wife who, over the course of the last 
umpteen years, has put up with my st ress-induced hypertension, ulcerative co litis, loss of libido, and displaced 
aggression. I will forgo that style in the actual dedication of this book to my wife, as I have something simpler to say.
1
WHY DON'T ZEBRAS GET ULCERS?
It's two o'clock in the morning and you're lying in bed.  You have something immensely important and challenging to
that next day—a critical m eeting, a presentation, an exam. You have  to get a decent night's rest, but you're
still wide awake. You try different strategies for relaxing—  take deep, slow breaths, try to imagine restful mountain 
scenery—but instead you keep thinking that unless you fall asleep in the next minute, y our career is finished. Thus 
you lie there, more tense by the second.
If you do this on a regular basis, somewhere around two-thirty, when you're really getting clammy, an entirely new, 
disruptive chain of thought will no doubt intrude. Suddenly, amid all your other worries, you begin to contemplate 
that nonspecific pain you've been having in your side, th at sense of exhaustion lately, that frequent headache. The 
realization hits you—I'm sick, fatally sick! Oh, why didn't I recognize the symptoms, why did I have to deny it, why 
didn't I go to the doctor?
When it's two-thirty on those mornings, I always have a brai n tumor. These are very useful  for that sort of terror, 
because you can attribute every conceiva ble nonspecific symptom to a brain tu mor and justify your panic. Perhaps 
you do, too; or maybe you lie there thinking that you have cancer, or an ulcer, or that you've just had a stroke.
Even though I don't know you, I feel confident in predicting that you don't lie there thinking, "I just know it; I have 
leprosy." True? You are exceedingly unlikely to obsess about getting a serious case of dysentery if it starts pouring. 
And few of us lie there feeling convin ced that our bodies are teeming with intestinal parasites or liver flukes.Page 4 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmInfluenza pandemic, 1918.
Of course not. Our nights are not filled  with worries about scarlet fever, mala ria, or bubonic plague. Cholera doesn't 
run rampant through our communities; river blindness, black  water fever, and elephantia sis are third world exotica. 
Few female readers will die in childbir th, and even fewer of those reading this  page are likely to be malnourished.
Thanks to revolutionary advances in medicine and public health, our patterns of disease have changed, and we are no 
longer kept awake at night worrying about infectious diseases (except, of course, AIDS or tuberculosis) or the 
diseases of poor nutrition or hygiene. As a measure of this, consider the leading causes of death in the United States in 
1900: pneumonia, tuberculosis, and influenza (and, if you were young, female, and inclined toward risk taking, 
childbirth). When is the last time you heard of scads of people dying of the flu? Yet the flu, in 1918 alone, killed 
many times more people than throughout the course of that most barbaric of conflicts, World War I.
Our current patterns of disease would be unrecognizable to our great-grandparents or, for that matter, to most 
mammals. Put succinctly, we ge t different diseases and are li kely to die in different ways
from most of our ancestors (or from most humans curr ently living in the less privileged areas of this 
planet). Our nights are filled with
worries about a different class of diseases; we are now living well enough and long enough to slowly fall apart.
The diseases that plague us now are ones of slow accu mulation of damage—heart dis ease, cancer, cerebrovascular 
disorders. While none of these diseas es is particularly pleasant, they certainly mark a big improvement over 
succumbing at age twenty after a week of sepsis or dengue feve r. Along with this relatively  recent shift in  the patterns 
of disease have come changes in the way we perceive the disease process. We have come to recognize the vastly 
complex intertwining of our biology and our emotions, the endless ways in which our personalities, feelings, and 
thoughts both reflect and influence the events in our bodies. One of the most interesting manifestations of this 
recognition is understanding that extreme emotional disturba nces can adversely affect us . Put in the parlance with 
which we have grown familiar, stress can make us sick, and a critical shift in medicine has been the recognition that 
many of the damaging diseases of slow accumulation can be either cause d or made far worse by stress.
In some respects this is nothing new. Centuries ago, sensit ive clinicians intuitively recognized the role of individual 
differences in vulnerabi lity to disease. Two individuals could get the same disease, yet the courses of their illness 
could be quite different and in vague, subjective ways might  reflect the personal character istics of the individuals. Or 
a clinician might have sensed that certain types of people we re more likely to contract certain types of disease. But 
since the twentieth centu ry, the addition of rigorous science to thes e vague clinical perceptions has made stress 
physiology—the study of how the body responds to stressful events—a real discipline. As a result, there is now an 
extraordinary amount of physiological, biochemical, and mo lecular information availabl e as to how all sorts of 
intangibles in our lives can affect very real bodily ev ents. These intangibles can include emotional turmoil, 
psychological characteristics, our  position in society, and how our society tr eats people of that position. And they can 
influence medical issues such as whether cholesterol gum s up our blood vessels or is safely cleared from the 
circulation, whether our fat cells stop listening to insulin and plunge us into diabetes, whether neurons in our brain 
will survive five minutes without oxygen during a cardiac arrest.Page 5 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThis book is a primer about stress, stress -related disease, and the mechanisms of coping with stress. How is it that our 
bodies can adapt to some st ressful emergencies, while other ones make us sick? Why are some of us especially 
vulnerable to stress-related diseases, and what does that have to do with ou r personalities? How can purely 
psychological turmoil make us sick? Wh at mighl stress have to do with our
vulnerability to depression, the speed at which we age, or how well our  memories work? What do our patterns of 
stress-related diseases have to do w ith where we stand on the rungs of societ y's ladder? Finally, how can we increase 
the effectiveness with which we cope with  the stressful world that surrounds us?
SOME INITIAL CONCEPTS
Perhaps the best way to begin is by making a mental list of the sorts of things we find stressful. No doubt you would 
immediately come up with some obvious examples—traffic, d eadlines, family relationships, money worries. But what 
if I said, "You're thinking like a sp eciocentric human. Think like a zebra for a second." Suddenly, new items might 
appear at the top of your list—serious physical injury, pred ators, starvation. The need for that prompting illustrates 
something critical— you and I ar e more likely to get an ulcer than a zeb ra is. For animals lik e zebras, the most 
upsetting things in life are acute physical crises. You are that zebra, a lion has ju st leapt out and ripped your stomach 
open, you've managed to get away, and now you have to spend the next hour evading the lion as it continues to stalk 
you. Or, perhaps just as stre ssfully, you are that lion, half-starved, and you  had better be able to sprint across the 
savanna at top speed and grab something to eat or you won't survive. These ar e extremely stressfu l events, and they 
demand immediate physiological adaptations if you are going to live. Your body's responses are brilliantly adapted for 
handling this sort of emergency.
An organism can also be plagued by chronic physical challenges. The locusts have eate n your crops, and for the next 
six months, you have to wander a dozen miles a day to get enough food. Drought, famine, parasites, that sort of 
unpleasantness—not the sort of experience we have often, bu t central events in the live s of non-westernized humans 
and most other mammals. The body's stress-responses are reasonably good at handling these sustained disasters.
Critical to this book is a third category of ways to get upset— psychological and social disruptions. Regardless of how 
poorly we are getting along with a family member or ho w incensed we are about losing a parking spot, we rarely 
settle that sort of thing with a fistfight. Likewise, it is a rare event when we have to st alk and personally wrestle down 
our dinner. Essentially, we humans live well enough and long
enough, and are smart enough, to generate all sorts of stressful events
Robert Longo, Untitled Work on Paper, 1981. (Two yuppies contesting the last double latte at a restaurant?)
purely in our heads. How many hippos worry about whether So cial Security is going to last  as long as they will, or 
what they are going to say on  a first date? Viewed from the perspective of the evolution of the animal kingdom, 
sustained psychological stress is a recen t invention, mostly limit ed to humans and other social primates. We can 
experience wildly strong emotions (p rovoking our bodies into an accompanying uproar)  linked to mere thoughts.* 
Two people can sit facing each other, do ing nothing more physically strenuous th an moving little pieces of wood now 
and then, yet this can be an emotiona lly taxing event: chess grand master s, during their tournaments, can place 
metabolic demands on their bodies that begin to approach those of athletes during the p eak of a competitive event.+ 
Or a person can do nothing more exciting  than sign a piece of paper: if she ha s just signed the order to fire a hated 
rival after months of plotting and maneuvering, her physiolog ical responses might be shockingly similar to those of aPage 6 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* The neurologist Antonio Damasio recounts a wonderful study done  on the conductor Herbert von Karajan, showing that the maestr o's heart would 
race just as wildly when he was listening to a piece of music as when he was conducting it.
+  Perhaps journalists are aware of this fa ct; consider this descriptio n of the Kasparov-Karpov chess tournament of 1990: "Kasp arov kept pressing 
for a murderous attack. Toward th e end, Karpov had to oppose threats of violence with more of the same and the game became a me lee."
savanna baboon who has just lunged and slashed the face of a competitor. And if someone spends months on end 
twisting his innards in anxiety, anger, and tension over so me emotional problem, this might very well lead to illness.
This is the critical point of this book: if you are that zebra  running for your life, or that lion sprinting for your meal, 
your body's physiological response mechanisms are superb ly adapted for dealing with such short-term physical 
emergencies. For the vast majority of b easts on this planet, stress is about a sh ort-term crisis, after which it's either 
over with or you're over with. When we sit around and worry about stressful things, we turn on the same physiological 
responses—but they are potentially a disaster when provok ed chronically. A large body of  evidence suggests that 
stress-related disease emerges, predominantly, out of the fact that we so often activat e a physiological system that has 
evolved for responding to acute physical emergencies, but we  turn it on for months on end, worrying about mortgages, 
relationships, and promotions.
This difference between the ways that we  get stressed and the ways a zebra does lets us begin to wrestle with some 
definitions. To start, I must call forth a concept that you were tortured with in ninth-grade biology and hopefully have 
not had to think about since— homeostasis. Ah, that dimly remembered  concept, the idea that the body has an ideal 
level of oxygen that it needs,  an ideal degree of acidity, an ideal temperat ure, and so on. All these different variables 
are maintained in homeostatic balance, the state in which all sorts of physiol ogical measures are being kept at the 
optimal level. The brain, it has been noted, has evolved to seek homeostasis.
This allows us to generate some simple initial workin g definitions that would suffice for a zebra or a lion. A stressor 
is anything in the outside world that knocks you out of homeostatic balance, and the stress-response is what your 
body does to reestablish homeostasis.
But when we consider ourselves and our human propensity to worry ourselves sick, we have to expand on the notion 
of stressors merely being things that knock you out of homeostatic balance. A stressor can also be the anticipation of 
that happening. Sometimes we are smart enough to see things coming and, based only on anticipation, can turn on a 
stress-response as robust as if the event had actually occurr ed. Some aspects of anticipato ry stress are not unique to 
humans—whether you are a huma n surrounded by a bunch of thugs in a dese rted subway station or a zebra face to 
face with a lion, you r heart is probably r acing, even though noth ing physically damaging
has occurred (yet). But unlike less cognitively sophisticated species, we can turn on the stress-response by thinking 
about potential stressors that may throw us out of homeosta tic balance far in the future . For example, think of the 
African farmer watching a swar m of locusts descend on his crops. He has eaten an adequate breakfast and is not 
suffering the homeostatic imbalance of st arving, but that farmer will still be undergoing a stress-response. Zebras and 
lions may see trouble coming in the next minute and mob ilize a stress-response in anti cipation, but they can't get 
stressed about events far in the future.
And sometimes we humans can be stressed by things that simply make no sense to zebras or lions. It is not a general 
mammalian trait to become anxious about mortgages or the Internal Revenue Service, ab out public speaking or fears 
of what you will say in a job interview, about the inevitability of death. Our human experience is replete with 
psychological stressors, a far cry from the physical world of hunger, injury, blood loss, or temperature extremes. 
When we activate the stress-response out of  fear of something that turns out to be real, we congratulate ourselves that 
this cognitive skill allows us to mobilize our defenses early . And these anticipatory defens es can be quite protective, 
in that a lot of what the stress-response is about is prep arative. But when we get into  a physiological uproar and 
activate the stress-response for no reason at all, or over something we cannot do anything about, we call it things like 
"anxiety," "neurosi s," "paranoia," or "needless hostility."
Thus, the stress-response can be mobilized  not only in response to physical or psychological insults, but also in 
expectation of them. It is this generality of the stress-res ponse that is the most surpri sing—a physiological system 
activated not only by all sorts of physical disasters but by just thinking about them as well. This generality was first 
appreciated about sixty-five years ago by one of the godfathers of stress physiology, Hans Selye. To be only a bit facetious, stress physiology exis ts as a discipline because this man was both  a very insightful scientist and lame at 
handling lab rats.
In the 1930s, Selye was just beginning his work in endocrinology, the study of hormonal communication in the body. 
Naturally, as a young, unheard-of assistant professor, he was fishing around for something with which to start his 
research career. A biochemist down the ha ll had just isolated some sort of extr act from the ovary, and colleagues were 
wondering what this ovarian extract did to the body. So Selye obtained some of the stuff from the biochemist and set 
about studying its effects. He attempted to inject his rats daily, butPage 7 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmapparently not with a great display of dexterity. Selye would try to inject the rats, miss them, drop them, spend half 
the morning chasing the rats around the room or vice versa, flailing with a broom to get them out from behind the 
sink, and so on. At the end of a number of months of this, Selye examined the rats and discovered something 
extraordinary: the rats had peptic ul cers, greatly enlarged ad renal glands (the source of two important stress 
hormones), and shrunken immune tissues. He was delighted; he had discovered the effects of the mysterious ovarian 
extract.
Being a good scientist, he ran a control group: rats injected  daily with saline alone, instead  of the ovarian extract. And, 
thus, every day they too were injected, dropped, chas ed, and chased back. At the end, lo and behold, the control rats 
had the same peptic ulcers, enlarg ed adrenal glands, and atrophy of  tissues of the immune system.
Now, your average budding scientist at this point might throw up his or her hands and furtively apply to business 
school. But Selye, instead, reasoned through what he had observed. The physiological changes couldn't be due to the 
ovarian extract after all, since the same  changes occurred in both the control and the experimental groups. What did 
the two groups of rats have in common ? Selye reasoned that it was his less-t han-trauma-free inject ions. Perhaps, he 
thought, these changes in the rats' bodies were some sort of nonspecific responses of the body to generic 
unpleasantness. To test this idea, he put some rats on the roof  of the research building in the winter, others down in the 
boiler room. Still others were exposed to forced exercise, or  to surgical procedures. In all cases, he found increased 
incidences of peptic ulcers, adrenal enla rgement, and atrophy of immune tissues.
We know now exactly what Selye was observing. He had just discovered the tip of the iceberg of stress-related 
disease. Legend (mostly promulgated by Selye himself) has it that Selye was the person who, searching for a way to 
describe the nonspecificity of the un pleasantness to which the rats were responding, borrowed a term from physics 
and proclaimed that the rats were undergoing "stress." In  fact, by the 1920s the term had already been introduced to 
medicine in roughly the sense that we understand it today by a physiologist named Walter Cannon. What Selye did 
was to formalize the concept with two ideas:
■  The body has a surprisingly similar set of responses (which he called the general adaptation syndrome, but which 
we now call the stress-response) to a broad array of stressors.
■  If stressors go on for too long, they can make you sick
HOMEOSTASIS PLUS: THE MORE STRESS- APPROPRIATE CONCEPT OF ALLOSTASIS
The homeostasis concept has been modified  in recent years in work originated by Peter Ster ling and Joseph Eyer of 
the University of Pennsylvania and exte nded by Bruce McEwen of  Rockefeller University* They have produced a 
new framework that I steadfastly tried to  ignore at first and have now succumbed  to, because it bri lliantly modernizes 
the homeostasis concept in a way that wo rks even better in making sense of stress (although not all folks in my 
business have embraced it, using "old  wine in a new bottle" imagery).
The original conception of homeostasis was grounded in tw o ideas. First, there is a single optimal level, number, 
amount for any given measure in the body. But that can't be  true—after all, the ideal blood pressure when you're 
sleeping is likely to be different than when you're ski jump ing. What's ideal under basal conditions is different than 
during stress, something central to allostatic thinking. (The field uses this Zen-ish sound bite about how allostasis is 
about "constancy through change." I'm not completely su re I understand what that means, but it always elicits 
meaningful and reinforcing nods when I toss it out in a lecture.)
The second idea in homeostasis is that  you reach that ideal se t point through some local  regulatory mechanism, 
whereas allostasis recognizes that any given set point can be regulated in a zi llion different ways, each with its own 
consequences. Thus, suppose there's a water shortage in California. Homeos tatic solution: mandate smaller toilet 
tanks.+ Allostatic solutions: smaller toilet tanks, convin ce people to conserve water, buy rice from Southeast Asia 
instead of doing water-intensive farming in a semi-arid st ate. Or suppose there's a wa ter shortage in your body. 
Homeostatic solution: kidneys are the ones that figure this out, tighten things up there, produce less urine for water 
conservation. Allostatic solutions: brain figures this out, te lls the kidneys to do their thing, sends signals to withdraw 
water from parts of your body where it easily evaporates (ski n, mouth, nose), makes you feel thirsty Homeostasis is 
about tinkering with this valve or that gizmo. Allostasis  is about the brain coordinating body-wide changes, often 
including changes in behavior.
* McEwen and his work are going to pop up fr equently in this book , as he is the giant of this field (as well as a wonderful man  and, a long time ago, 
my thesis advisor).
+ Physiologists actually spend a lot of time  thinking about the inner workings of toilet
bowlsPage 8 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA final feature of allostatic thinking dovetails beautifully with thinking about stressed humans. The body doesn't pull 
off all this regulatory complexity only to correct some set point that has gone awry It can also make allostatic changes 
in anticipation of a set point that is likely to go awry. And thus we hark back to the critical point of a few pages 
back—we don't get stressed being chased by predators. We ac tivate the stress-response in anticipation of challenges, 
and typically those challenges are the pu rely psychological and social tumult th at would make no sense to a zebra. 
We'll be returning repeatedly to what allost asis has to say about stress-related disease.
WHAT YOUR BODY DOES TO ADAPT TO AN ACUTE STRESSOR
Within this expanded framework, a stressor can be defined as anything that throws your body out of allostatic balance 
and the stress-response is your body's attempt to restore al lostasis. The secretion of certain hormones, the inhibition of 
others, the activation of particular parts of the nervous system, and so on. And regardless of the stressor— injured, 
starving, too hot, too cold, or psychologically stressed—you turn on the same stress-response.
It is this generality that is puzzling. If you are trained in  physiology, it makes no sense at first glance. In physiology, 
one is typically taught that specific challenges to the body trigger specific responses and adaptations. Warming a body 
causes sweating and dilation of blood vessels in the skin. Chilling a body causes just the opposite—constriction of 
those vessels and shivering. Being too hot seems to be a very specific and different ph ysiological challenge from 
being too cold, and it would seem logical  that the body's responses to these two very different states should be 
extremely different. Inst ead, what kind of crazy bodily syst em is this that is turned on  whether you are too hot or too 
cold, whether you are the zebra, the lion,  or a terrified adolescent going to a high school dance? Why should your 
body have such a generalized and stereo typical stress-response, regardless of the predicament you find yourself in?
When you think about it, it actually makes sense, given the ad aptations brought about by the stress-response. If you're 
some bacterium stressed by food shortage, you go into a suspended, dormant state. But if you're a starving lion, you're 
going to have to run after someone. If you're some plant stressed by some one intent on eating you, you stick 
poisonous chemicals in your leaves But if you're a zebra being chased
by that lion, you have to run for it. For us vertebrates, the core of the stress-response is built around the f act that your 
muscles are going to work like crazy. And thus the muscles need energy, right now, in the most readily utilizable 
form, rather than stored away somewher e in your fat cells for some building project next spring. One of the hallmarks 
of the stress-response is the rapid mobilization of energy  from storage sites and the in hibition of further storage. 
Glucose and the simplest forms of proteins and fats come pouring out of your fat cells, liver, and muscles, all to stoke 
whichever muscles are struggling to save your neck.
If your body has mobilized all that glucose, it also needs to deliver it to the critical muscles as rapidly as possible. 
Heart rate, blood pressure, and breathi ng rate increase, all to transport nutrients and oxygen at greater rates.
Equally logical is another feature of the stress-response. During an emergency, it makes sense that your body halts 
long-term, expensive building projects. If there is a tornado b earing down on the house, this isn't the day to repaint the 
garage. Hold off on the long-term projects until you know there is a long term. Thus, during stress, digestion is 
inhibited—there isn't enough time to derive the energetic benefits of the slow process of digestion, so why waste 
energy on it? You have better things to do than digest breakfast when you are trying to avoid being someone's lunch. 
The same thing goes for growth and reproduction, both expe nsive, optimistic things to be doing with your body 
(especially if you are female). If the lion's on your tail, two steps behind you, worry about ovulating or growing 
antlers or making sperm some other time. During stress, growth and tissue repair is curtailed, sexual drive decreases in 
both sexes; females are less likely to ov ulate or to carry pregnancies to term, while males begin to have trouble with 
erections and secrete less testosterone.
Along with these changes, immunity is also inhibited. The immune system, which defends against infections and 
illness, is ideal for spotting the tumor cell that will kill you in a year, or making enough antibodies to protect you in a 
few weeks, but is it really needed this instant? The logi c here appears to be the same —look for tumors some other 
time; expend the energy more wisely now. (As we will see in  chapter 8, there are some major problems with this idea 
that the immune system is suppressed during stress in order to save energy. But that idea will suffice for the moment.)
Another feature of the stress-response becomes apparent during times of extrem e physical pain. With sufficiently 
sustained stress, our
perception of pain can become bl unted It's the middle of a battle;
soldiers are storming a stronghold with wild abandon. A so ldier is shot, grievously injured, and the man doesn't even 
notice it. He'll see blood on his clothes and worry that one of his buddies near him has been wounded, or he'll wonder 
why his innards feel numb. As the batt le fades, someone will point with am azement at his injury—didn't it hurt like 
hell? It didn't. Such stress-induced an algesia is highly adaptive and well documented. If yo u are that zebra and your Page 9 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htminnards are dragging in the dust, you sti ll have to escape. Now would not be a part icularly clever time to go into shock 
from extreme pain.
Finally, during stress, shifts occur in cognitive and sens ory skills. Suddenly certain aspects of memory improve, 
which is always helpful if you're trying to figure out how to get out of an emergency (Has this happened before? Is 
there a good hiding place?). Moreover, yo ur senses become sharper. Think ab out watching a terr ifying movie on 
television, on the edge of your seat at the tensest part. The slightest noise—a  creaking door—and you  nearly jump out 
of your skin. Better memory, sharper detection of sensations—all quite adaptive and helpful.
Collectively, the stress-response is ideal ly adapted for that zebra or lion. Energy is mobili zed and delivered to the 
tissues that need them; long-term building and repair proj ects are deferred until the disaster has passed. Pain is 
blunted, cognition sharpened. Walter Cannon, the physiologist  who, at the beginning of the century, paved the way for 
much of Selye's work and is generally considered the other godfather of the field, concen trated on the adaptive aspect 
of the stress-response in dealing with  emergencies such as these. He form ulated the well-known "fight-or-flight" 
syndrome to describe the stress-response, and he viewed it in a very positive light. His books, with titles such as The 
Wisdom of the Body, were suffused with a pleasing optimism about th e ability of the body to  weather all sorts of 
stressors.
Yet stressful events can sometimes make us sick. Why?
Selye, with his ulcerated rats, wrestled w ith this puzzle and came up with an answer that was sufficiently wrong that it 
is generally thought to have cost him a Nobel Prize for all his other work. He developed a three-part view of how the 
stress-response worked. In the initial (alarm) stage a stressor  is noted; metaphorical alarms go off in your head, telling 
you that you are hemorrhaging, too cold, low on blood sugar, or whatever. The second stage (adaptation, or 
resistance) comes with the successful mo bilization of the stress-response system and the reattainment of allostatic 
balance.
It is with prolonged stress that one enters the third stage, which Selye termed "exhaustion," where stress 
related diseases emerge. Selye believed that one be comes sick at that point because stores of the
hormones secreted during the stress-respon se are depleted. Like an army that runs out of ammunition, suddenly we 
have no defenses left agai nst the threatening stressor.
It is very rare, however, as we will see, that any of the crucial hormones are actually depleted during even the most 
sustained of stressors. The army does not run out of bullets. Instead, the body spends so much on the defense budget 
that it neglects education and health care and social services (okay, so I may have  a hidden agenda here). It is not so 
much that the stress-response runs out, but rather, with sufficient activation, that the stress-response can become more 
damaging than the stressor itself, especially when the stress is purely psycho logical. This is a critical concept, because 
it underlies the emergence of  much stress-related disease.
That the stress-response itself can beco me harmful makes a certain sense when you examine the things that occur in 
reaction to stress. They are generally sh ortsighted, inefficient, and penny-wise  and dollar-foolish,  but they are the 
sorts of costly things your body has to do to respond effectively in an emergency. And if you experience every day as 
an emergency, you will pay the price.
If you constantly mobilize energy at th e cost of energy storage,  you will never store any surplus energy. You will 
fatigue more rapidly, and your risk of developing a form  of diabetes will even in crease. The consequences of 
chronically activating your cardiovascular system are similarly damaging: if your blood pressure rises to 180/100 
when you are sprinting away from a lion , you are being adaptive, but if it is 180/ 100 every time you see the mess in 
your teenager's bedroom, you could be heading for a cardiovascular disaster. If you constantly turn off long-term 
building projects, nothing is ever repaired. For paradoxical  reasons that will be explai ned in later chapters, you 
become more at risk for peptic ulcers. In kids, growth can be inhibited to the point of a rare but recognized pediatric 
endocrine disorder—stress dwarfism— and in adults, repair and remodeling of bone and other tissues can be 
disrupted. If you are constantly under stress, a variety of  reproductive disorders may ensue. In females, menstrual 
cycles can become irregu-lar or cease en tirely; in males, sperm co unt and testosterone levels may decline. In both 
sexes, interest in sexual behavior decreases.
But that is only the start of your problems in response to chronic or repealed stressors. If you suppress immune 
function too long and too much,you are now more likely to fall victim to a number of infectious diseases, and be less 
capable of combating them once you have them.
Finally, the same systems of the brain that function more cleverly
during stress can also be damaged by one class of hormones secretedPage 10 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmduring stress. As will be discussed, this may have something to do with how rapidly our brains lose cells during aging, 
and how much memory loss occurs with old age.
All of this is pretty grim. In  the face of repeated stressors, we may be ab le to precariously rea ttain allostasis, but it 
doesn't come cheap, and the efforts to re establish that balance will eventually wear us down. Here's a way to think 
about it: the "two elephants on a seesaw" model of stress-rel ated disease. Put two little kids on a seesaw, and they can 
pretty readily balance themselv es on it. This is allostatic balance when nothing stressful is going on, with the children 
representing the low levels of the various stress hormones that will be presented in coming chapters. In contrast, the 
torrents of those same stress hormones released by a stressor can be thought of as two massive elephants on the 
seesaw. With great effort, they  can balance themselves as well. But if you constantly try to bala nce a seesaw with two 
elephants instead of two little kids, all sorts of problems will emerge:
■  First, the enormous potential energies of the two ele phants are consumed balancing the seesaw, instead of being 
able to do something more useful, like mowing the lawn or paying the bills. This is equivalent to diverting energy 
from various long-term building projects in orde r to solve short-term stressful emergencies.
■  By using two elephants to do the job, damage will o ccur just because of how larg e, lumbering, and unsubtle 
elephants are. They squash th e flowers in the process of en tering the playground, they strew leftovers and garbage all 
over the place from the frequent snacks th ey must eat while balancing the seesaw, they wear out the seesaw faster, and 
so on. This is equivalent to a pattern of stress-related diseas e that will run through many of the subsequent chapters: it 
is hard to fix one major problem in the body without knocking something else out of balance (the very essence of 
allostasis spreading across systems throughout the body). Thus, you may be able to solve one bit of imbalance brought 
on during stress by using your elephants (your massive levels of various stress hormones), but such great quantities of 
those hormones can make a mess of something else in the process. And a long history of doing this produces wear and 
tear throughout the body, termed allostatic load.
■ A final, subtle problem: when two elepha nts are balanced on a seesaw, it's tough for them to get off. Either one hops 
off and the other comes crashing to the ground, or there's the extremely delicate task of coordinating their 
delicate, lithe leaps at the same time. This is
a metaphor for another theme that will run through subseq uent chapters—sometimes stress-related disease can arise 
from turning off the stress-response too slowly, or turning off the different components of the stress-response at 
different speeds. When the secr etion rate of one of the hormones of the stress-response returns to normal yet another 
of the hormones is still being secreted like mad, it can be the equivalent of one elephant suddenly being left alone on 
the seesaw, crashing to earth.*
The preceding pages should allow you to begin to appreciate the two punch lines of this book:
The first is that if you plan to get st ressed like a normal mammal, dealing with  an acute physical challenge, and you 
cannot appropriately turn on the stress-response, you're in big trouble. To  see this, all you have to do is examine 
someone who cannot activate the stress-response. As will be explained in the coming chapters, two critical classes of 
hormones are secreted during stress. In  one disorder, Addison's disease, you ar e unable to secrete one class of these 
hormones. In another, called Shy-Drager syndrome, it is the secretion of th e second class of hormones that is 
impaired. People with Addison's disease or  Shy-Drager syndrome are not more at  risk for cancer or diabetes or any 
other such disorders of slow accumulatio n of damage. However, people with un treated Addison's di sease, when faced 
with a major stressor such as a car accide nt or an infectious illness, fall into an "Addisonian" crisis , where their blood 
pressure drops, they cannot maintain circulation, they go into shock. In Shy-Drager syndrome, it is hard enough 
simply to stand up, let alone go sprinting after a zebra for dinner—mere standing causes a severe drop in blood 
pressure, involuntary twitching and rippling of muscles, di zziness, all sorts of unpleasantness. These two diseases 
teach something important, na mely, that you need the stress-response duri ng physical challeng es. Addison's and Shy-
Drager represent catastrophic failures of turning on the stress-response. In coming chapters, I will discuss some 
disorders that involve subtler undersecretion of stress hormones. These include chronic fatigue syndrome, 
fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis, a subtype of depression, critically ill patients, and possibly individuals with post-
traumatic stress disorder.
* If you find this analogy silly, imagine wh at it is like to have a bunch of scientists  locked up together at a stress conferen ce working with it. I was 
at a meeting where this analogy first emerged, and in no time there were factions pushing analogies about ele-
phants on pogo sticks, elephants on m onkey bars and merry-go-rounds, sumo
wrestlers on seesaws, and so on.
That first punch line is obviously cri tical, especially for the zeb ra who occasionally has to run for its life. But the 
second punch line is far more relevant to us, sitting frustr ated in traffic jams, worrying about expenses, mulling over 
tense interactions with colleagues. If you repeatedly turn on the stress-response, or if you cannot turn off the stress-Page 11 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmresponse at the end of a stressful even t, the stress-response can ev entually become damaging . A large percentage of 
what we think of when we talk about stress-related diseases are disorders of excessive stress-responses.
A few important qualifications are necessa ry concerning that last statement, whic h is one of the central ideas of this 
book. On a superficial level, the message it imparts might seem  to be that stressors make you sick or, as emphasized 
in the last few pages, that chronic or repeated stressors make you sick. It is actually more accurate to say that chronic 
or repeated stressors can potentially make you sick or can increase your risk of being sick. Stressors, even if massive, 
repetitive, or chronic in nature, do not automatically lead to illness. And the theme of the last section of this book is to 
make sense of why some people develop stress-related diseases more readily than others, despite the same stressor.
An additional point should be emphasized. To state that "chronic or repeated stre ssors can increase your risk of being 
sick" is actually incorrect, but in a subtle way that will initia lly seem like semantic nit-picking. It is never really the 
case that stress makes you sick, or ev en increases your risk of being sick . Stress increases your risk of getting diseases 
that make you sick, or if you have such a disease, stress increases the risk of your defenses being overwhelmed by the 
disease. This distinction is important in a few ways. Firs t, by putting more steps between a stressor and getting sick, 
there are more explanations for indi vidual differences— why only some pe ople wind up actually getting sick. 
Moreover, by clarifying the progression be tween stressors and illness, it becomes easier to design ways to intervene in 
the process. Finally, it begins to explain why the stress concept often seems so suspect or slippery to many medical 
practitioners—clinical medicine is traditionally quite good  at being able to make st atements like "You feel sick 
because you have disease X," but is usua lly quite bad at being able to explain why you got disease X in the first place. 
Thus, medical practitioners often say, in effect, "You feel sick because you ha ve disease X, not because of some 
nonsense having to do with stress; however, this ignores the stressors' role in bringing about or worsening the disease 
in the first place.
With this framework in mind, we can now begin the task of under-standing the individual steps in this 
system. Chapter 2 introduces the
hormones and brain systems involved in the stress-response : which ones are activated during stress, which ones are 
inhibited? This leads the way to chapters 3 through 10, which examine the individual sy stems of your body that are 
affected. How do those hormon es enhance cardiovascular tone during stress, and how does chronic stress cause heart 
disease (chapter 3)? How do those hormones and neural sy stems mobilize energy during  stress, and how does too 
much stress cause energetic diseases (chapter 4)? And so on. Chapter 11 examines the in teractions between stress and 
sleep, focusing on the vicious circle of  how stress can disrupt sleep and how sleep deprivation is a stressor. Chapter 12 
examines the role of stress in the aging process and the disturbing r ecent findings that sustaine d exposure to certain of 
the hormones secreted during stress may actually accelerate the aging of  the brain. As will be seen, these processes are 
often more complicated and subtle than they may seem from the simple picture presented in this chapter.
Chapter 13 ushers in a topic obviously of central importance to understanding our own propensity toward stress-
related disease: why is psychological stress stressful? This  serves as a prelude to the remaining chapters. Chapter 14 
reviews major depression, a horrible psychiatric malady that af flicts vast numbers of us and is often closely related to 
psychological stress. Chapter 15 discusses what personality differences have to do with individual differences in 
patterns of stress-related disease. This is the world of anxiety disorders and Type A-ness, plus some surprises about 
unexpected links between personality and the stress-resp onse. Chapter 16 considers a puzzling issue that lurks 
throughout reading this book—sometimes stress feels good, good enough that we'll pay good money to be stressed by 
a scary movie or roller-coaster ride. Th us, the chapter considers when stress is a good thing, and the interactions 
between the sense of pleasure that can be triggere d by some stressors and the process of addiction.
Chapter 17 focuses above the level of the individual, looking at what  your place in society, an d the type of society in 
which you live, has to do with patterns of stress-related disease. If you plan to go no further, here's one of the punch 
lines of that chapter: if you want to  increase your chances of av oiding stress-related diseases, make sure you don't 
inadvertently allow yourself to be born poor.
In many ways, the ground to be covered up to the final ch apter is all bad news, as we are regaled with the evidence 
about new and unlikely parts of our bodies and minds that are made miserable by stress. The final chapter is meant 
to give some hope. Given the same external stressors,  certain bodies and certain psyc hes deal with stress
better than others. What are those folks doing right, and what can the rest of us learn from them? We'll look at the 
main principles of stress management and some surprising and exciting realms in which th ey have been applied with 
stunning success. While the intervening chapters document our numerous vulnerabili ties to stress-related disease, the 
final chapter shows that we have an enormous potential to protect ourselves from many of  them. Most certainly, all is 
not lost.Page 12 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm2
GLANDS, GOOSEFLESH, AND HORMONES
In order to begin the process of learning how stress can
make us sick, there is something about the workings of
the brain that we have to a ppreciate. It is perhaps best
illustrated in the following rather technical paragraph
from an early invest igator in the field:
As she melted small and wonderful in hi s arms, she became infinitely desirable to  him, all his blood-v essels seemed to 
scald with intense yet tender desire, for her, for her softness , for the penetrating beauty of her in his arms, passing into 
his blood. And softly with that marvelous swoon-like caress of his hand in pure soft desire, softly he stroked the silky 
slope of her loins, down, down between her soft, warm buttocks, coming nearer and nearer to the very quick of her. 
And she felt him like a flame of desire, yet tender, and she fe lt herself melting in the flam e. She let herself go. She felt 
his penis risen against her with silent amazing force and assertion,  and she let herself go to him. She yielded with a 
quiver that was like death, she went all open to him.
Now think about this. If D. H. Lawrence is to your taste,  there may be some interestin g changes occurring in your 
body. You haven't just run up a flight of stairs, but maybe your heart is beating faster. The temperature has not 
changed in the room, but you may have ju st activated a sweat gland or two. A nd even though certain  rather sensitive 
parts ofyour body are not being overtly stimulated by touch, you are suddenly very aware of them.
You sit in your chair not moving a muscle, and simply think a thought, a thought having to do with feeling angry or 
sad or euphoric or lustful, and suddenly your pancreas secretes some hormone. Your pancreas? How did you manage 
to do that with your pancreas? You don't even know where your pancreas is. Your liver is making an enzyme that 
wasn't there before, your spleen is text-messaging somethin g to your thymus gland, blood flow in little capillaries in 
your ankles has just changed. All from thinking a thought.
We all understand intellectually that the brain can regulate functions throughout the rest of the body, but it is still 
surprising to be reminded of how far-r eaching those effects can be. The purpose of this chapte r is to learn a bit about 
the lines of communication be tween the brain and elsewhere,  in order to see which site s are activated and which are 
quieted when you are sitting in your chair and feeling severely stressed. This is a prerequisite for seeing how the stress
-response can save your neck during a sprint across the savanna, but make you sick during months of worry.
STRESS AND THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The principal way in which your brain can tell the rest of the body what to do is to send messages through the nerves 
that branch from your brain down your spine and out to the periphery of your body. One dimension of this 
communication system is pretty straightforward and familiar . The voluntary nervous system is a conscious one. You 
decide to move a muscle and it happens. This part of the nervous system allows you to shake hands or fill out your tax 
forms or do a polka. It is another branch of the nervous syst em that projects to organs be sides skeletal muscle, and this 
part controls the other interesting things your body does—b lushing, getting gooseflesh, having an orgasm. In general, 
we have less control over what our brain says to our sweat glands, for example, than to our thigh muscles. (The 
workings of this automatic nervous system are not entirel y out of our control, howeve r; biofeedback, for example, 
consists of learning to alter this automatic function consciously. Potty training is another example of us gaining 
mastery. On a more mundane level, we  are doing the same thing when we repress a loud burp during a wedding 
ceremony.) The set of nerve projections  to places like sweat glands carry messages that are relatively involuntary 
and automatic. It is thusPage 13 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm(Outline of some of the effects of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems on various organs and glands.
termed the autonomic nervous system, and it has everything to do with your response to stress. One half of this system 
is activated in response to stress, one half is suppressed.
The half of the autonomic nervous syst em that is turned on is called the sympathetic nervous system* Originating in 
the brain, sympathetic projectio ns exit your spine and branch out to nearly  every organ, every bl ood vessel, and every 
sweat gland in your body. They even project to the scads of tiny little muscles attached to hairs on your body. If you 
are truly terrified by something and activ ate those projections, your hair stands on end; gooseflesh results when the 
parts of your body are activated  where those muscles exist but lack hairs attached to them.
The sympathetic nervous system  kicks into action during emergencies, or what you think are emergencies. It helps 
mediate vigilance, arousal, act ivation, mobilization. To generations of first-year medical students, it is described 
through the obligatory lame joke about the sympathetic nervous system mediating the four F's of behavior—flight, 
fight, fright, and sex. It is th e archetypal system that is turned on at times when life gets exciting or alarming, such as 
during stress. The nerve endings of this system release adrenaline. When someone jumps out from behind a door and 
startles you, it's your sympathetic nervous system re leasing adrenaline that causes your stomach to clutch. 
Sympathetic nerve endings also  release the closely related substance noradrenaline. (Adrenaline and noradrenaline Page 14 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmare actually British desi gnations; the American terms, which will be used from now on, are epinephrine and 
norepinephrine.) Epinephrine is secreted as a resu lt of the actions of the sympathe tic nerve endings in your adrenal 
glands (located just above your kidneys); norepinephrine is secreted by all the othe r sympathetic nerve endings 
throughout the body. These ar e the chemical messengers that kick vari ous organs into gear, within seconds.
The other half of the autonomic nervous system plays an  opposing role. This parasympathetic component mediates 
calm, vegetative activities—everything but the four F's. If  you are a growing kid and you have gone to sleep, your 
parasympathetic system is activated. It
* Where did this name come from? According to the eminent stress physiolog ist Seymour Levine, this goes back to Galen, who beli eved that the 
brain was responsible for rational thought and the peripheral vis cera for emotions. Seeing this co llection of neural pathways l inking the two 
suggested that it allowed your brain to sympathize with your visc era. Or maybe for your viscera to sympathize with your brain. As we'll see shortly, 
the other half of the autonomic nervou s system is called the parasympathetic nervous system. Para, meaning "a longside," refers to the not 
very exciting fact that the parasympathetic neural  projections sit alongside those of the sympathetic
"Oh, that's Edward and his fight-or-flight mechanism."
promotes growth, energy storage, and other optimistic pro cesses. Have a huge meal, s it there bloated and happily 
drowsy, and the parasympathetic is going like gangbusters. Sprint for your life across the savanna, gasping and trying 
to control the panic, and you've turned the parasympathetic component down. Thus, the autonomic system works in 
opposition: sympathetic and parasympathetic projec-tions from the brain course their way out to a particular organ 
where, when activated, they  bring about opposite results. The sympathetic system speeds up the heart; the 
parasympathetic system slows it down. The sympathetic system diverts blood flow to your muscles; the 
parasympathetic does the opposite. It's no surprise that it woul d be a disaster if both bran ches were very active at the 
same time, kind of like putting your foot on the gas and brake simultaneously. Lots of safety features exist to make 
sure that does not happen. For example,  the parts of the brain th at activate one of the two branches typically inhibit 
the other,
YOUR BRAIN:
THE REAL MASTER GLAND
The neural route represented by the sy mpathetic system is a first means by which the brain can mobilize waves of 
activity in response to a stre ssor. There is another way as well—through the secretion of hormones. If a neuron (a cell 
of the nervous system) secretes a chemi cal messenger that travels a thousandth of an inch and causes the next cell in 
line (typically, another neuron) to do something different, that messenger is called a neurotransmitter. Thus, when the 
sympathetic nerve endings in your hear t secrete norepinephrine, which causes heart muscle to work differently, 
norepinephrine is playing a neurotransmitter role. If a neuron (or any cell) secretes  a messenger that, instead, 
percolates into the bloodstream and af fects events far and wide, that messenge r is a hormone. All sorts of glands 
secrete hormones; the secretion of some of them is turned on during stress, and the secretion of others is turned off.Page 15 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhat does the brain have to do with all of these glands secreting hormones? People used to think, "Nothing." The 
assumption was that the peripheral glands of the body—your pancreas, your adrenal, your ovaries, your testes, and so 
on—in some mysterious way "knew" what they were doing, had "minds of their own." They would "decide" when to 
secrete their messengers, without directions from any other or gan. This erroneous idea gave rise to a rather silly fad 
during the early part of the twentieth century. Scientists note d that men's sexual drive declined with age, and assumed 
that this occurs because the testicles of aging men secrete less male sex hormone , testosterone. (Actually, no one knew 
about the hormone testosterone at the time; they just referred  to mysterious "male factors"  in the testes. And in fact, 
testosterone levels do not plummet with age. Instead, the decline is moderate and highly variable from one male to the 
next, and even a decline in testosterone to perhaps 10 percent of normal levels  does not have much of an effect on 
sexual behavior.) Making another leap, they then ascribed ag ing to diminishing sexual drive, to lower levels of male 
factors. (One may then wonder why females, without testes, ma nage to grow old, but the female half of the population 
didn't figure much in these ideas back then.) How, then, to reverse aging? Give the aging males some testicular 
extracts.
Soon, aged, monied gentlemen were check ing into impeccable Swiss sanitariums and getting injected daily in their 
rears with testicu-lar extracts from dogs, from roosters, from monkeys. You could even
go out to the stockyards of the sanitarium and pick out the goat of
Advertisement, New York Therapeutic Review, 1893.
your choice—just like picking lobsters in a restaurant (and more than one gentleman arrived for his appointment with 
his own prized animal in tow). This soon led to an offshoot of  such "rejuvenatio n therapy," namely, 
"organotherapy"—the grafting of little bi ts of testes themselves. Thus was bo rn the "monkey gland" craze, the term 
gland being used because journalists were forbidden to print the racy word testes. Captains of industry, heads of state, 
at least one pope—all signed up. And in the aftermath of the carnage of World War I, there was such a shortage of 
young men and such a surfeit of marriages of younger women to  older men, that therapy of  this sort seemed pretty 
important.
Naturally, the problem was that it didn't work. There wasn't any testosterone in the testicular extracts—patients would 
be injected with a water-based extract, and testosterone does not go into solution in water. And the smidgens of organs 
that were transplanted would die almost immediately, with the scar tissu e being mistaken for a healthy graft. And 
even if they didn't die, th ey still wouldn't work —if aging testes are secreting less testosterone, it is not because the 
testes are fail-nig, hul because another orga n (stay tuned) is no longer telling them  to do so. Put in .1 brand-new sel of 
testes and they should fail also, for
lack ol .1 stimulatory signal. Uui nol a problem, Nearly everyone
reported wondrous results anyway. If you're paying a fortun e for painful daily injections of extracts of some beast's 
testicles, there's a certain incentive to decide you feel like a young bull. One big placebo effect.Page 16 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWith time, scientists figured out that the testes and othe r peripheral hormone-secreting glands were not autonomous, 
but were under the control of something else. Attention turned  to the pituitary gland, sitting just underneath the brain. 
It was known that when the pituitary was damaged or diseased, hormone secretion throughout the body became 
disordered. In the early part of the century, careful expe riments showed that a peripheral gland releases its hormone 
only if the pituitary first releases a ho rmone that kicks that gland into action. The pituitary contains a whole array of 
hormones that run the show throughout the rest of the body; it is the pituitary that actually knows the game plan and 
regulates what all the other glands do. This realization gave  rise to the memorable cliche that the pituitary is the 
master gland of the body.
This understanding was disseminated far and wide, mostly in the Reader's Digest, which ran the "I Am Joe's" series of 
articles ("I Am Joe's Pancreas," "I Am Joe's Shinbone," "I Am Joe's Ovaries," and so on). By the third paragraph of "I 
Am Joe's Pituitary," out comes that ma ster gland business. By the 1950s, howev er, scientists were already learning 
that the pituitary wasn't the master gland after all.
The simplest evidence was that if you removed the pituitary from a body and put it in a small bowl filled with 
pituitary nutrients, the gland would act abnormally. Variou s hormones that it would norm ally secrete were no longer 
secreted. Sure, you might say, remove any organ and throw it in some nutrient soup and it isn't going to be good for 
much of anything. But, interestingly, while this "explanted " pituitary stopped secreting cer tain hormones, it secreted 
others at immensely high rates. It wasn't just that the pituitary was traumatized and had shut down. It was acting 
erratically because, it turned out , the pituitary didn't really have the whol e hormonal game plan. It  would normally be 
following orders from the brain, and there was no brain on hand in that small bowl to give directions.
The evidence for this was relatively easy to obtain. Destroy the part of the br ain right near the pituitary and the 
pituitary stops secreting some hormones and secretes too much  of others. This tells you that the brain controls certain 
pituitary hormones by stimulating their release and controls  others by inhibiting them. The problem was to figure out 
how the brain did this. By all logic, you would look for nerves to pro-
ject from the brain to the pi tuitary (like the nerve projecti ons to the heart and elsewhere) , and for the brain to release 
neurotransmitters that called the shots. But no one could find these projections. In 1944, the physiologist Geoffrey 
Harris proposed that the brain was also a hormonal gland, that  it released hormones that traveled to the pituitary and 
directed the pituitary's actions . In principle, this was not a crazy idea; a quarter-century before, one of the godfathers 
of the field, Ernst Scharrer, had shown that some other hormones, thought to originate from a peripheral gland, were 
actually made in the brain. Nevertheless, lots of scientis ts thought Harris's idea was bonkers. You can get hormones 
from peripheral glands like ovaries, testes, pancreas— but your brain oozing hormones? Preposterous! This seemed 
not only scientifically implausible but somehow also an unseemly and indecorous thing for your brain to be doing, as 
opposed to writing sonnets.
Two scientists, Roger Guillemin and Andrew Schally, began looking for these brain hormones. This was a 
stupendously difficult task. The brain communicates with the pi tuitary by a minuscule ci rculatory system, only 
slightly larger than the period at the end of this senten ce. You couldn't search for thes e hypothetical brain "releasing 
hormones" and "inhibiting hormones" in the general circulation of blood; if the hormones existed, by the time they 
reached the voluminous general circulation, they would be diluted beyond detection. Instead, you would have to 
search in the tiny bits of tissue at the base of the brain containing those blood vessels going from the brain to the 
pituitary.
Not a trivial task, but these two scientists were up to it. Th ey were highly motivated by the abstract intellectual puzzle 
of these hormones, by th eir potential clinical a pplications, by the acclaim waiting at the end of this scientific rainbow. 
Plus, the two of them loathed each othe r, which invigorated the quest. Initially, in the late 1950s, Guillemin and 
Schally collaborated in the search for th ese brain hormones. Perhaps one tired even ing over the test tube rack, one of 
them dissed the other in some way—the actual events have  sunk into historical obscurity; in any case a notorious 
animosity resulted, one enshrined in the annals of science at least on a par with the Greeks versus the Tro-jans, maybe 
even with Coke versus Pepsi.  Guillemin and Schally went their separate wa ys, each intent on bein g the first to isolate 
the puta-tive brain hormones.
How do you isolate a hormone that may not exist or that, even if it does, occurs in tiny amounts in a minuscule 
circulation system to which you can't gain access? Roth Guillemin and Schally hit on the same strategy. They Started 
collecting animal brains from slaughterhouses. Cut
out the part at the base of the brain, near the pituitary. Throw a bunch of those in a blender, pour the resulting brain 
mash into a giant test tube filled with  chemicals that purify the mash, collect th e droplets that come out the other end. 
Then inject those droplets into a rat and see if the rat's pituitary changes its pattern of hormone release. If it does, 
maybe those brain droplets contain one of those imagined releasing or inhibiting hormones. Try to purify what's in the 
droplets, figure out its chemical  structure, make an artificial  version of it, and see if that regulates pituitary function. 
Pretty straightforward in theory. But it took them years.Page 17 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmOne factor in this Augean task was th e scale. There was at best a minuscule  amount of these hormones in any one 
brain, so the scientists wound up dealing with thousands of brains at a time. The gr eat slaughterhouse war was on. 
Truckloads of pig or sheep brains we re collected; chemists pour ed cauldrons of brain into monumental chemical-
separation columns, while others pondered the thimblefuls of liquid that dribbled out the bottom, purifying it further 
in the next column and the ne xt.... But it wasn't just mindless assembly-l ine work. New types of chemistry had to be 
invented, completely novel ways of testing the effects in the living body of hormones that might or might not actually 
exist. An enormously difficult scientific problem, made worse by the fact that lots of influential people in the field 
believed these hormones were fic tions and that these two guys were wasting a lot of time and money.
Guillemin and Schally pi oneered a whole new corporate ap proach to doing science. One of our cliches is the lone 
scientist, sitting there at two in the morning, trying to figu re out the meaning of a result. Here there were whole teams 
of chemists, biochemists, physiologists, and so on, coordina ted into isolating these putative hormones. And it worked. 
A "mere" fourteen years into the ventur e, the chemical structure of the firs t releasing hormone was published.* Two 
years after
* "So," asks the breathless spor ts fan, "who won the race—Guillemin or Schally? " The answer depends on how you define "getting there first." The 
first hormone isolated was one that indir ectly regulates the release of  thyroid hormone (that is, it controls the way in which the pituitary regulates 
the thyroid). Schally and crew were the fi rst to submit a paper for publication saying, in effect, "There really does exist a h ormone in the brain that 
regulates thyroid hormone release, and its chemical structure is X." In a photo finish, Guillemin' s team submitted a paper reac hing the identical 
conclusion five weeks later. But as a comp lication, a number of months before, Guille min and friends had been the first to publ ish a paper saying, 
in effect, "If you synthesize a chemical with structure X, it regulates thyroid hormone release and does so in a way similar to  the way hypothalamic 
brain mash does; we don't know yet if whatever it is in the (continued)
that, in 1971, Schally got there with the sequence for the next hypothalamic hormone, and Guillemin published two 
months later. Guillemin took the next round in 1972, beat ing Schally to the next hormone by a solid three years. 
Everyone was delighted, the by -then-deceased Geoffrey Harris was proved correct, and Guillemin and Schally got the 
Nobel Prize in 1976. One of them, urbane and knowing what would sound right, proclaimed that he was motivated 
only by science and the impulse to help mankind; he noted how stimulating and productive his interactions with his co
-winner had been. The other, less polis hed but more honest, said the competi tion was all that drove him for decades 
and described his relationship with his co-winner as "m any years of vicious attack s and bitter retaliation."
So hooray for Guillemin and Schally; the brain turned out to be the master gland. It is now recognized that the base of 
the brain, the hypothalamus, contains a huge array of those releasing an d inhibiting hormones, which instruct the 
pituitary, which in turn regulates the secretions of the peri pheral glands. In some cases, the brain triggers the release 
of pituitary hormone X through the action of a single rel easing hormone. Sometimes it halts the release of pituitary 
hormone Y by releasing a single inhibiting hormone. In some cases, a pituitary hormone is controlled by the 
coordination of both a releasing and an inhibiting hormone from the brain—dual control. To make matters worse, in 
some cases (for example, the miserabl y confusing system that I study) th ere is a whole array of hypothalamic 
hormones that collectively regulate the pituitary, some as releasers, others as inhibitors.
(continued) hypothalamus also ha s structure X, but we wouldn't be one bit surp rised if it did." So Guillemin was the first to s ay, "This structure 
works like the real thing," and Schally was the first to say, "This structure is the real thing." As I have discovered firsthan d many decades afterward, 
the battle-scarred veterans of the Guillemin- Schally prizefight years are still willing to get worked up as to which counts as the knockout.
One might wonder why something ob vious wasn't done a few years into this insane competition, like the National Institutes of He alth sitting the 
two down and saying, "Instead of us giving you all of this extr a taxpayers' money to work separately, why don't you two work to gether?" 
Surprisingly, this wouldn't necessarily be  all that great for scientif ic progress. The competition se rved an impo rtant purpose.  Independent 
replication of results is essential in scie nce. Years into a chase, a scientist triu mphs and publishes the structure of a new h ormone or brain chemical. 
Two weeks later the other gu y comes forward. He has every incentive on earth to prove that  the first guy was wrong. Instead, he is forced to say, "I 
hate that son of a bitch, but I have to admit he's right. We get the identical structure." That is how you know that your evide nce is really  solid, from 
independent confirmation by a hostile competito r. When everyone works toge ther, things usually do go  faster, but everyone winds  up sharing the 
same assumptions, leaving th em vulnerable to small, unexamined mistakes that can grow into big ones.
HORMONES OF THE STRESS-RESPONSE
As the master gland, the brain can expe rience or think of something stressful and activate componen ts of the stress-
response hormonally. Some of the hypothalamus-pituitary-per ipheral gland links are activ ated during stress, some 
inhibited.
Two hormones vital to the stress-respon se, as already noted, are epinephrine and norepineph rine, released by the 
sympathetic nervous system. Another important class of hormones in the response to stress are called glucocorticoids. 
By the end of this book you will be astonishingly informed about glucocorticoid trivia, since I am in love with these 
hormones. Glucocorticoid s are steroid hormones. (Steroid is used to describe the genera l chemical structure of five 
classes of hormones: androgens—the famed "anabolic" steroids like testosterone that get you thrown out of the 
Olympics—estrogens, progestins, mineralocor-ticoids, and gluc ocorticoids.) Secreted by the adrenal gland, they often 
act, as we will see, in ways similar to epinephrine. Epinep hrine acts within seconds; glucocorticoids back this activity 
up over the course of minutes or hours.Page 18 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmBecause the adrenal gland is basically witless, glucocorticoid release must ulti mately be under the control of the 
hormones of the brain. When something stressful happens or you think a stressful thought, the hypothalamus secretes 
an array of releasing hormones into the hypothalamic-pit uitary circulatory system that gets the ball rolling. The 
principal such releaser is called CR H (corticotropin releasing hormone), while a variety of more minor players 
synergize with CRH.* Within fifteen s econds or so, CRH triggers the pituitary  to release the hormone ACTH (also 
known as corticotropin). After ACTH is released into the bloodstream, it reaches the ad renal gland and, within a few 
minutes, triggers glucocorticoid release. Together, gluc ocorticoids and the secretions  of the sympathetic nervous 
system (epinephrine and norepinephrine ) account for a large percentage of what
* For the three people on ea rth who are reading this book, read the prior edition, and remember anything from it, you may be wondering why the 
hormone previously known as CRF (corticotro pin releasing factor) has been transformed into CRH. By the rule s of endocrinology, a putative 
hormone is referred to as a "f actor" until its chemical st ructure is confirmed, at which po int it graduates into being a "hormo ne." CRF achieved that 
status in the mid-1980s, and my continued use of "CRF" as recently as the 1998 editio n was merely a nostalgic and pathetic atte mpt on my part to 
hold on to those reckless days of my youth  before CRF was tamed. After much painful psychological work, I have come to terms wi th this and will 
use "CRH" throughout.
Outline of the control of glucocorticoid secretion. A stressor is sensed or anticipated in the brain, triggering the 
release of CRH (and related hormones) by the hypothalamus. These hormones enter the private circulatory system 
linking the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary, causing the release of ACTH by the anterior pituitary. ACTH 
enters the general circulation and triggers the release of glucocorticoids by the adrenal gland.
happens in your body during stress. Thes e are the workhorses of the stress-response.Page 19 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmIn addition, in times of stress your pancreas  is stimulated to release a hormone called glucagon.  Gluc ocorticoids, 
glucagon,  and the sympathetic nervous system raise circulating levels of the sugar glucose. As we will see, these 
hormones are essential for mobilizing energy during stre ss. Other hormones are activat ed as well. The pituitary 
secretes prolactin, whic h, among other effects, plays a role in suppressing reproduction during stress. Both the 
pituitary and the brain also s ecrete a class of endogenous mo rphine-like substances called endorphins and 
enkephalins, which help blunt pain perception, among other things. Finally, the pituitary also secretes vasopressin, 
also known as antidiuretic hormone, which plays a role in the cardiovascular stress-response.
Just as some glands are activated in response to stress, various hormonal systems are inhibited during stress. The 
secretion of various reproductive hormones such as estrog en, progesterone, and testosterone is inhibited. Hormones 
related to growth (such as growth hormone) are also inhibited,  as is the secretion of insuli n, a pancreatic hormone that 
normally tells your body to store energy for later use.
(Are you overwhelmed and intimidated by these terms, wondering if you should have bought some Deepak Chopra 
self-help book instead? Pl ease, don't even dream of me morizing these names of horm ones. The import ant ones are 
going to appear so regularly in the co ming pages that you will soon be comfor tably and accurately slipping them into 
everyday conversation and birthday cards to favorite cousins. Trust me.)
A FEW COMPLICATIONS
This, then, is an outline of our current understanding of the neural and hormonal messen gers that carry the brain's 
news that something awful is happening. Cannon was the first to recognize the role of epinephrine, norepinephrine, 
and the sympathetic nervous system. As no ted in the previous chapter, he coined the phrase "fight-or-flight" response, 
which is a way of conceptualizing the stress-response as preparing the body for that sudden burst of energy demands. 
Selye pioneered the glucocorticoid component of the story. Since then the roles of the other hormones and neural 
systems have been recognized. In  the dozen years since this book first came out, various new minor
hormonal players have been added to the picture, and, undoubtedly, more are ye t to be discovered. Collectively, these 
shifts in secretion and activation form the primary stress-response.
Naturally there are complications. As will be reiterated throughout the following chapters, the stress-response is about 
preparing the body for a major expenditu re of energy—the canonical (or, perh aps, Can-nonical) "fight-or-flight" 
response. Recent work by the psychologist  Shelley Taylor of UCLA has forced people to rethink this. She suggests 
that the fight-or-flight response is what dealing with stress is about in males, and that it has been overemphasized as a 
phenomenon because of the long-standing bias among (mostly male) scientists to study males rather than females.
Taylor argues convincingly that the physiology of the stress- response can be quite different in females, built around 
the fact that in most species, females are typically less aggressive than males,  and that having dependent young often 
precludes the option of flight. Showing that she can match the good old boys at coming up with a snappy sound bite, 
Taylor suggests that rather than the female stress-response being about fight-or-flight, it's about "tend and befriend"—
taking care of her young and seeking social  affiliation. As will be seen in the fi nal chapter of the book, there are some 
striking gender differences in stress management styles that support Taylor's view, many of them built around the 
propensity toward social affiliation.
Taylor also emphasizes a hor monal mechanism that helps co ntribute to the "tend and befriend" stress-response. While 
the sympathetic nervous system, glucocorticoids, and the other hormones just reviewed are about preparing the body 
for major physical demands, the hormone oxytocin seems more related to the tend and befriend themes. The pituitary 
hormone plays a role in causing the fe male of various mammalian species to imprint on her child after birth, to 
stimulate milk production, and to stimulate maternal behavior. Moreover, oxytocin may be critical for a female to 
form a monogamous pair bond with a male (in the relative ly few mammalian species that are monogamous).* And the 
fact that oxytocin is secreted during stress in females suppo rts the idea that responding to stress may not just consist of 
preparing for a mad dash across the savanna, but may also involve feeling a pull toward sociality.
A few critics of Taylor's influential work have pointed out that sometimes the stress-respon se in females can be about 
fight-or-flight,
* A list of species that proba bly should not include humans, by a number of biological criteria. But that's another book.
rather than affiliation. For ex ample, females are certainly capable of being wildly aggressive (oft en in the context of 
protecting their young), and often sprint for their lives or for a meal (among lions, for example, females do most of the 
hunting). Moreover, sometimes the stress-response in males can  be about affiliation rather  than fight-or-flight. This 
can take the form of creating affiliativ e coalitions with other males or, in those rare monogamous species (in which 
males typically do a fair amount of the child care), some of the same tending and befriending behaviors as seen among 
females. Nevertheless, amid these criticisms, there is a widespread acceptance of the idea that the body does not Page 20 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmrespond to stress merely by preparing for aggression or escap e, and that there ar e important gender differences in the 
physiology and psychology of stress.
Some more complications arise. Even when considering the classic stress-response built around fight-or-flight, not all 
of its features work quite the same way in different specie s. For example, while stress cau ses a prompt decline in the 
secretion of growth hormone in rats, it  causes a transient increase in growth hormone secretion in humans (this puzzle 
and its implicatio n for humans are discussed in the chapter on growth).
Another complication concerns th e time course in actions of epinephrine a nd glucocorticoids. A few paragraphs back, 
I noted that the former works within seconds, while the latter backs up epinephrine's activity over the course of 
minutes to hours. That's great—in the f ace of an invading army, sometimes the defensive response can take the form 
of handing out guns from an armory (epinephrine working in seconds), and a defense can also take the form of 
beginning construction of new tanks (glucocorticoids working over hours). But within the framework of lions chasing 
zebras, how many sprint s across the grasslands actually go on for hour s? What good are glucocorticoids if some of 
their actions occur long after your typi cal dawn-on-the-savanna stressor is over with? Some glucocorticoid actions do 
help mediate the stress-response. Others help mediate the recovery from the stress-response. As will be described in 
chapter 8, this probably has important implications for a number of autoimmune diseas es. And some glucocorticoid 
actions prepare you for the next stressor. As will be discussed in chapter 13, this is critical for understanding the ease 
with which anticipatory psychological stat es can trigger glucocorticoid secretion.
Another complication concerns consistency of the stress- response when it is activated. Central to Selye's 
conceptualization was the belief that  whether you are too hot or too cold , or are that zebra or that lion
(or simply stressed by the repetitiveness of that phrase), you activate the same pattern of s ecretion of glucocorticoids, 
epinephrine, growth hormone,  estrogen, and so forth for each of those stressors. This is mostly true, and this 
intertwining of the various branches of  the stress-response into a package deal starts at the brain, where the same 
pathway can both stimulate CRH rel ease from the hypothalamus and activ ate the sympatheti c nervous system. 
Moreover, epinephrine and glucocortico ids, both secreted by the adrenal, can potentiate each other's release.
However, it turns out that not all stressors produce the exact same stress-response. Th e sympathetic nervous system 
and glucocorticoids play a role in the response to virt ually all stressors. But the speed and magnitudes of the 
sympathetic and glucocorticoid  branches can vary depending on the stressor, and not all of the other endocrine 
components of the stress-respo nse are activated for all stressors. The orch estration and patternin g of hormone release 
tend to vary at least somewhat from stressor to stressor , with there being a particular hormonal "signature" for a 
particular stressor.
One example concerns the relative magni tude of the glucocorticoid versus the sympathetic stress-responses. James 
Henry, who has done pioneering work on the ability of social  stressors such as subordinan ce to cause heart disease in 
rodents, has found that the sympathetic nervous system is par ticularly activated in a socially  subordinate rodent that is 
vigilant and trying to cope with a challenge. In contrast, it is  the glucocorticoid system that is relatively more activated 
in a subordinate rodent that has given up on coping. Studies of humans have shown what may be a human analogue of 
that dichotomy. Sympat hetic arousal is a relative marker of anxiet y and vigilance, while heavy secretion of 
glucocorticoids is more a marker of depression. Furthermore,  all stressors do not cause s ecretion of both epinephrine 
and norepinephrine, nor of norepinephrine from all branches of the sympathetic system.
In some cases, the stress signature sneak s in through the back door. Two stressors can produce identical profiles of 
stress hormone release into the bloodstr eam. So where's the signature that differ entiates them? Tissues in various parts 
of the body may be altered in their sensitivity to a stress hormone in the case of  one stressor, but not the other.
Finally, as will be the topic of chapte r 13, two identical stressors can cause very different stress signatures, depending 
on the psychological context of  the stressors. Thus, every stressor does no t generate exactly the same stress-response. 
This is hardly surprising. Despite the dimensions common to various stressors, it is still a very different
physiological challenge to be too hot or too cold, to be extremely anxious or deeply depressed. Despite this, the 
hormonal changes outli ned in this chapter, which occur pretty reliably  in the face of impressi vely different stressors, 
still constitute the superstructure of the neural and endo crine stress-response. We are now  in a position to see how 
these responses collectively save our skins during acute emergencies but can make us sick in the long run.
3Page 21 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSTROKE, HEART ATTACKS, AND VOODOO DEATH
It's one of those unexpected emergencies: you're walking
down the street, on your way to  meet a friend for dinner.
You're already thinking about what you'd like to eat,
savoring your hunger. Come around the corner and—oh
no, a lion! As we now know, activities throughout your
body shift immediately to meet the crisis: your digestive tract shuts
down and your breathing rate skyrockets. Secretion of sex hormones isinhibited, while epinephrine, norepinephrine, and glucocorticoids
pour into the bloodstream. And if your legs are going to save you, one
of the most important additional things that better be going on is an
increase in your cardiovascular output, in order to deliver oxygen and
energy to those ex ercising muscles.
THE CARDIOVASCULAR STRESS-RESPONSE
Activating your cardiovascular system is relatively easy, so long as you have a sympathetic nervous system plus some 
glucocorticoids and don't bother with too many details. The first thing you do is shift your heart into higher gear, get it 
to beat faster. This is acco mplished by turning down pa rasympathetic tone, and in tu rn activating the sympathetic 
nervous system. Glucocorticoids add to this as well, both by activating neurons in the brain stem that stimulate 
sympathetic arousal, and by enhancing th e effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine on hear t muscle. You also want 
to increase the force with which your heart beats. This involves a trick with the veins that return blood
to your heart. Your sympathetic nervou s system causes them to constrict, to  get more rigid. And that causes the 
returning blood to blast through those veins with more force. Blood returns to your heart with more force, slamming 
into your heart walls, distending them more than usual... and those heart walls, like a stretched rubber band, snap back 
with more force.
So your heart rate and blood pressure have gone up. The next task is to distribute the blood prudently throughout that 
sprinting body of yours. Arteries are relaxed—dilated—that lead to your muscles, increasing blood flow and energy 
delivery there. At the same time, there is a dramatic decr ease in blood flow to nonessential parts of your body, like 
your digestive tract and skin (you also shift the pattern of blood flow to your brain, someth ing that will be discussed in 
chapter 10). The decrease in bl ood flow to the gut was first noted in 1833, in an extended study of a Native American 
who had a tube placed in his abdomen af ter a gunshot wound there.  When the man sat quietly, his gut tissues were 
bright pink, well supplied with blood.  Whenever he became anxiou s or angry, the gut muco sa would blanch, because 
of decreased blood flow. (Pure speculation, perhaps, but one  suspects that his transients  of anxiety and anger might 
have been related to those white folks sitting around experimenting on him, instead of doing something useful, like 
sewing him up.)
There's one final cardiovascular trick in response to stress, involving the kidneys. As that zebra with its belly ripped 
open, you've lost a lot of blood. And you're going to need th at blood to deliver energy to your exercising muscles. 
Your body needs to conserve  water. If blood volume go es down because of dehydra tion or hemorrhage, it doesn't 
matter what your heart and veins are doing; your ability to deliver glucose and oxygen to your muscles will be 
impaired. What's the most likely place to  be losing water? Urine formation, and the source of the water in urine is the 
bloodstream. Thus, you decrease blood flow to your kidney s and, in addition, your brain sends a message to the 
kidneys: stop the process, reabsorb th e water into the circulat ory system. This is accomplished by the hormone 
vasopressin (known as antidiuretic hormone for its ability to block diuresis, or ur ine formation), as well as a host of 
related hormones that regulate water balance.
A question no doubt at the forefront of ev ery reader's mind at this point: if one of the features of the cardiovascular 
stress-response is to conserve water in the circulation, an d this is accomplished by inhibitio n of urine formation in the Page 22 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmkidneys, why is it that when we are really terrified, we wet our pants? I congratulate the reader for homing in on one 
of the remaining unanswered questions of modern science. In trying to
answer it, we run into a larger one. Why do we have bladders? They are dandy  if you are a hamster or a dog, because 
species like those fill their bl adders up until they are just about to burst and then run around their territories, 
demarcating the boundaries—odoriferous little "keep out" signs to the neighbors.* A bladder is logical for scent-
marking species, but I presume that you don't do that sort of thing.+ For humans, it is a myst ery, just a boring storage 
site. The kidneys, now those are someth ing else. Kidneys are reabsorptive, bidi rectional organs, which means you can 
spend your whole afternoon happily putting water in from the circulation and getting some back and regulating the 
whole thing with a collection of hormones. But once the urin e leaves the kidneys and head s south to the bladder, you 
can kiss that stuff good-bye; the bladder is unidirectional. When it comes to a stressful emergency, a bladder means a 
lot of sloshy dead weight to carry in your sprint acro ss the savanna. The answer is obvious: empty that bladder.++
* One of my intrepid research assistants, Michelle Pearl, called up some of America's leading urologists to ask them why bladde rs evolved. One 
comparative urologist (as well as Jay Kaplan, whose research is discussed in this chap ter) took the findi ngs about territorial rodents having bladders 
to make scent trails and inverted  the argument—maybe we have bladders so that we can avoid continual dr ibble of urine that woul d leave a scent 
trail so some predator could track us. The same urologist noted, however, that a weakness with his idea is that fish also have bladders, and they 
presumably don't have to worry about leaving scent trails. A nu mber of urologists suggested that maybe the bladder acts as a bu ffer between the 
kidney and the outside world, to reduce th e chance of kidney infections. However, it seems odd to develop an organ exclusively for the purpose of 
protecting another organ from infection. Pearl suggested that it may have evolved for male reproduction—the acidity of urine is n't very healthy for 
sperm (in ancient times, women would use half a lemon as a diaphr agm), so perhaps it made sense to  evolve a storage site for th e urine. A 
remarkable percentage of the urologists que stioned said something like, "Well, it woul d be an extreme social liability to not h ave a bladder," before 
realizing that they had just suggested that vertebrates evolved bl adders tens of millions of year s ago so that we humans wouldn 't inadvertently pee 
on our party clothes. Mostly, however, the urologists said things  like, "To be honest, I've never thought about this before," " I don't know and I 
talked to everyo ne here and they don't know a nything either," and "Beats me."
The strangest thing about it all is that ma ny animals may not actually take advantag e of their bladder's storage capacity. In m y vast experience 
watching baboons go about their urinary business, it is apparent that  they very rarely ho ld it in when they have to go. Clearly , there's a lot of work 
to be done in this area.
+ Well, maybe some humans do. When the A llies breached the Rhine River in Germany during World War II by putting up a pontoon b ridge, 
General George Patton apparently walked across it, stopped in the middle, and, w ith cameras blazing, took a piss in the Rhine. "I've been waiting a 
long time for that," he said. Co ntinuing this intersection of m ilitarism, bodies of water, and scent-marking, during the Korean  War, American troops 
would line up along the Yalu River, across from Chinese so ldiers facing them, and urin ate en masse into the river.
++ It should be noted that in kids, while  stress can increase the occurrence of enures is (loss of control of the bladder), most  kids who have nocturnal 
enuresis (bed-we tting) (continued)
"So! Planning on roaming the neighborhood with some of your buddies today?"Page 23 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmEverything is great now—you have kept your blood volume up, it is roaring through the body with more force and 
speed, delivered where it is most needed . This is just what you want when running away from a lion. Interestingly, 
Marvin Brown of the University of California at San Die go and Laurel Fisher of the University of Arizona have 
shown that a different picture emerges when one is being vig ilant—a gazelle crouching in the grass, absolutely quiet, 
as a lion passes nearby. The sight of a lion is obviously a stressor, but of a subtle sort; while having to remain as still 
as possible, you must also be prepared, physiologically, for a wild sprint across the grasslands with the briefest
(continued) are psychologically normal. This entire discussion rais es that mysterious problem for guys as to why it is so diffi cult to urinate at a 
urinal when you are stressed by a crowd wa iting in line behind you, all impatiently waitin g to get back to their seats before t he movie starts.
of warnings. During such vigilance, heart rate and blood flow tend to slow down, and vascular resistance throughout 
the body increases, including in the mu scles. Another example of the compli cating point brought up at the end of 
chapter 2 about stress signatures—you don't turn on the identical stress-response fo r every type of stressor.
Finally, the stressor is over, the lion pursues some other pedestrian, you can return to your dinner plans. The various 
hormones of the stress-response turn off, your parasympathetic nervous system begins to slow down your heart via 
something called the vagus nerve, and your body calms down.
CHRONIC STRESS AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
So you've done all the right things during your lion encounter. But if you put your heart, blood vessels, and kidneys to work in this way every time someone irritates you, y ou increase your risk of h eart disease. Never is the 
maladaptiveness of the stress-response during psychological  stress clearer than in th e case of the cardiovascular 
system. You sprint through the restaurant district terrified, and you alter cardiovascular functions to divert more blood flow to your thigh muscles. In such cases, there's a wonderful match between blood flow and metabolic demand. In 
contrast, if you sit and think about a major deadline looming next week, driving yourself into a hyperventilating panic, 
you still alter cardiovascular function to divert more bl ood flow to your limb muscle s. Crazy. And, potentially, 
eventually damaging.
How does stress-induced elevation of blood pressure during chronic psychological stress wind up causing 
cardiovascular disease, the numb er one killer in the United  States and the developed wo rld? Basically, your heart is 
just a dumb, simple mechanical pump, and your blood vessels are nothing more exciting than hoses. The 
cardiovascular stress-response essentially co nsists of making them work harder for a while, and if you do that on a 
regular basis, they will wear out, just like any pump or hose you'd buy at Sears.
The first step in the road to stress-re lated disease is developing hypertension, chronically elevated blood pressure.* 
This one seems
* Resting blood pressure where sy stolic pressure—the upper number,  reflecting the force with wh ich blood is leaving your heart—
is above 140, or when diastolic pressure—t he lower number, reflecting the force with  which blood returns to your heart—is above  
90, is considered elevated.
obvious: if stress causes your blood pressure to go up, then chronic stress causes your blood pressure to go up 
chronically. Task accomplished , you've got hypertension.
It's a bit messier because a vi cious cycle emerges at this point. The little blood vessels  distributed th roughout your 
body have the task of regulating blood flow to the local neighborhoods as a means of ensuring adequate local levels of 
oxygen and nutrients. If you chronically raise your blood pressure—chronically increase the force with which blood is 
coursing through those small vessels—those vessels have to work harder to regulate the blood flow. Think of the ease 
it takes to control a garden hose spritzing water versus a firehose with a hydrant's worth of force gushing through it. 
The latter takes more muscle. And that's  precisely what happens at these sma ll vessels. They build a thicker muscle 
layer around them, to better control the increased force of blood flow. But as a result of these thicker muscles, these 
vessels now have become more rigid, more resistant to the force of blood flow. Which tends to increase blood 
pressure. Which tends to further increas e vascular resistance. Which tends ...
So you've gotten yourself chronically high blood pressure. This isn't great for your heart. Blood is now returning to 
your heart with more force and, as mentioned, this ma kes for a greater impact upon the heart muscle wall that 
encounters that tsunami. Over time, that wall will thicke n with more muscle. This is termed "left ventricular 
hypertrophy," which means increasing the mass of the left vent ricle, the part of the heart in question. Your heart is 
now lopsided, in a sense, being overdeveloped in one quadrant. This increases the risk of developing an irregular 
heartbeat. And more bad news: in addition, this thickene d wall of ventricular heart muscle may now require more 
blood than the coronary arteries can supply. It turns out that after controlling for age, having left ventricular 
hypertrophy is the single best predictor of cardiac risk.Page 24 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe hypertension isn't good for your blood vessels, either. A general feature of the circulatory system is that, at 
various points, large blood vessels (your descending aorta, for example) branch into smal ler vessels, then into even 
smaller ones, and so on, down to tiny beds of thousands of capillaries. This process of splitting into smaller and 
smaller units is called bifurcation. (As a measure of how extraord inarily efficient this repeat ed bifurcation is in the 
circulatory system, no cell in your body is more than five cells away from a blood vessel—yet the circulatory system 
takes up only 3 percent of body mass.) One feature of systems that branch in this way is that the points of bifurcation 
are particularly vulnerable to injury. The branch points
in the vessel wall where bifur cation occurs bear the brunt of the fluid pressure slamming into them. Thus, a simple 
rule: when you increase the fo rce with which the fluid is moving throu gh the system, turbulen ce increases and those 
outposts of wall are more likely to get damaged.
With the chronic increase in bl ood pressure that accomp anies repeated stress, damage begi ns to occur at branch points 
in arteries throughout the body. The smooth inner lining of the vessel begins to tear or form little craters of damage. 
Once this layer is damaged, you get an inflammatory  response—cells of the immune system that mediate 
inflammation aggregate at the in jured site. Moreover, cells full of fatty nu trients, called foam cells, begin to form 
there, too. In addition, during stress the sympathetic nervous system makes your blood more viscous. Specifically, 
epinephrine makes circulating platelets (a type of blood cell that promotes clotting) more likely to clump together, and 
these clumped platelets can get gummed up in these aggregates as well. As we'll see in the next chapter, during stress 
you're mobilizing energy into the bloodstream, including fat, glucose, and the "bad" type of cholesterol, and these can 
also add to the aggregat e. All sorts of fibrous gunk builds up there, too. You've now made yourself an atherosclerotic 
plaque.
Therefore, stress can promote plaque formation by increasing the odds of blood vessels being damaged and inflamed, 
and by increasing the likelihood that circ ulating crud (platelets, fat, cholesterol,  and so on) sticks to those inflamed 
injury sites. For years, clinicians have tried to get a se nse of someone's risk of cardi ovascular disease by measuring 
how much of one particular type of crud  there is in the bloodstream. This is, of  course, cholesterol,  leading to such a 
skittishness about cholesterol that the egg industry has to ur ge us to give their cholesterol-filled products a break. High 
levels of cholesterol, particularly of "bad" cholesterol,  certainly increase the risk fo r cardiovascular disease. But 
they're not a great predictor; a surpri sing number of folks can tolerate high levels of bad cholesterol without 
cardiovascular consequences, and only about half of heart att ack victims have elevated cholesterol levels.
In the last few years, it is becoming clear that the amount of damaged, inflam ed blood vessels is a better predictor of 
cardiovascular trouble than is the amount of circulating crud . This makes sense, in that you can eat eleventy eggs a 
day and have no worries in the atherosclerosis realm if there are no damaged vessels for crud to stick to; conversely, 
plaques can be forming even amid "healthy" levels of  cholesterol, if there is enough vascular damage.
A healthy blood vessel (left), and one with an atherosclerotic plaque (right).
How can you measure the amount  of inflammatory damage? A great marker is turning out to be something called C-
reactive protein (CRP). It is made in the liver and is secreted in response to a si gnal indicating an injury. It migrates to 
the damaged vessel where it helps amplify the cascade of in flammation that is developing. Among other things, it 
helps trap bad cholesterol in the inflamed aggregate.
CRP is turning out to be a much better predictor of cardiovas cular disease risk than choles terol, even years in advance 
of disease onset. As a result, CRP has suddenly become qu ite trendy in medicine, and is  fast becoming a standard 
endpoint to measure in general blood work on patients.
Thus, chronic stress can cause hypert ension and atherosclerosis— the accumu lation of these plaques. One of the 
clearest demonstrations of this, with great application to our own lives, is to be found in the work of the physiologist 
Jay Kaplan at Bowman Grey Medical Sc hool, Kaplan built on the landmark work of an earlier physiologist, James 
Henry (who was mentioned in the previous chapter), who showed that purely social stress caused both hypertension 
and atherosclerosis in mice. Kaplan and colleagues have shown a similar phenomenon ir primates, bringing the story 
much closer home to us humans. Establish male monkeys in a social group, and over the course of days tc months Page 25 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthey'll figure out where they stand with respect to one another. Once a stable dominance hierar chy has emerged, the 
las place you want to be is on the botto m: not only are you subject  to the most physical st ressors but, as will be 
reviewed in chapter 13 on psy-chological  stress, to the most psychological stre ssors as well. Such sub-ordinate males 
show a lot of the physiological indices of chronically turning on their stress-re sponses. And often these animals wind 
up with atherosclerotic plaques—their arte ries are all clogged up. As evi-dence th at the atherosclerosis arises from the 
overactive sympathetic
nervous system compon ent of the stress-response, if Kaplan gave the monkeys at risk drugs th at prevent sympathetic 
activity (beta-blockers), th ey didn't form plaques.
Kaplan showed that another group of animals is also at risk. Suppose you keep the dominance system unstable by 
shifting the monkeys into new groups every month, so that al l the animals are perpetually in  the tense, uncertain stage 
of figuring out where they stand with respect to everyone else. Under those ci rcumstances, it is generally the animals 
precariously holding on to their places at the top of the shifti ng dominance hierar chy who do the mo st fighting and 
show the most behavioral and hormonal indices of stress. And, as it turns out, they have tons of atherosclerosis; some 
of the monkeys even have heart attacks (abrupt blockages of one or more of the coronary arteries).
In general, the monkeys under the most social stress were most  at risk for plaque formatio n. Kaplan showed that this 
can even occur with a low-fat di et, which makes sense, since, as will be described in the next chapter, a lot of the fat 
that forms plaques is being mobilized from stores in the body, rather than coming from  the cheeseburger the monkey 
ate just before the tense conference. But if you couple the social stress with a high-fat diet, the effects synergize, and 
plaque formation goes through the roof.
So stress can increase the risk of atherosc lerosis. Form enough atherosclerotic plaques to seriously obstruct flow to the 
lower half of the body and you get claudication, which means that your legs and ch est hurt like hell for lack of oxygen 
and glucose whenever you walk; you are th en a candidate for bypass surgery. If th e same thing happens to the arteries 
going to your heart, you can get coro nary heart disease, myocardial isch emia, all sorts of horrible things.
But we're not done. Once you've formed those plaques, continued stress can get you in trouble another way. Again, 
increase stress and increase bl ood pressure, and, as the blood moves w ith enough force, incr ease the chances of 
tearing that plaque loose, rupturing it. So maybe you've had a plaque form in a huge aqueduct of a blood vessel, with 
the plaque being way too small to cause any troubl e. But tear it loose now, form what is called a thrombus, and that 
mobile hairball can now lodge in a much smaller blood vesse l, clogging it completely. Cl og up a coronary artery and 
you've got a myocardial infarct, a heart attack (and this thrombus route accounts fo r the vast majority of heart attacks). 
Clog up a blood vessel in the brain and you have a brain infarct (a stroke).
But there's more bad news. If chronic stress has made a me ss of your blood vessels, each individual new stressor is 
even more damaging, for
an additional insidious reason. This has to do with myocar dial ischemia, a condition that  arises when the arteries 
feeding your heart have become sufficiently clogged that your heart itself is partially deprived of blood flow and thus 
of oxygen and glucose.* Suppose something acutely stressful is happening, and your cardiovascular system is in great 
shape. You get excited, the sympathe tic nervous system kicks into action. Your hear t speeds up in a strong, Page 26 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmcoordinated fashion, and its contractiv e force increases. As a result of work ing harder, the heart muscle consumes 
more energy and oxygen and, conveniently, the arteries going to your heart dilate in order to deliver more nutrients 
and oxygen to the muscle. Everything is fine.
But if you encounter an acute stressor with  a heart that has been su ffering from chronic myocardial ischemia, you're in 
trouble. The
* It may initially seem illogical for the h eart to need special arteries feeding it. When the walls of th e heart—the heart musc le—require the energy 
and oxygen stores in the blood, you might imagine that these coul d simply be absorbed from the vast amounts of blood passing th rough the 
chambers of the heart. But instead it has evolved that heart musc le is fed by arteries coursing from the main aorta. As an anal ogy, consider people 
working at a city's water reserv oir. Every time they get thirsty,  they might go over to the edge  of the reservoir with a bucket  and pull up some water 
to drink. (Instead, the usual solution is to  have a water fountain in the office, fed indirectly by that reservoir just outside .)
A necrotic heart.
coronary arteries, instead of vasodilating in response to the sympathetic nervous system, vaso constrict. This is very 
different from the scenario described at the beginning of the chapter, where you are constricting some big blood 
vessels that deliver blood to unessential parts of your body. Instead, these are the small vessels diverting blood right to 
your heart. Just when your heart needs more oxygen and glucose delivered through th ese already clogged vessels, 
acute stress shuts them down even more, producing a shortage of nutrients for the heart, myocardial ischemia. This is 
exactly the opposite of what you need. Your chest is going to hurt like crazy—angina pectoris. And it turns out that it 
takes only brief periods of hypertension to cause this vasoconstrictive problem. Ther efore, chronic myocardial 
ischemia from atherosclerosis sets you up  for, at the least, terrible chest pain  whenever anything physically stressful 
occurs. This is the perfect demonstration of how stress is  extremely effective at wors ening a preexisting problem.
When cardiology techniques improved in the 1970s, cardiologis ts were surprised to discover that we are even more 
vulnerable to trouble in this realm th an had been guessed. With the old techniques, you would take someone with 
myocardial ischemia and wire him (m en are more prone to heart disease than women) up to some massive ECG 
machine (same as EKG), focus a huge X- ray camera on his chest, and then send  him running on a treadmill until he 
was ready to collapse. Just as one wo uld expect, blood flow to the heart wo uld decrease and his chest would hurt.
Some engineers invented a miniature ECG machine that can be strapped on while you go about your daily business, 
and ambulatory electrocardiography was invented. Everyone got a rude surpri se. There were little ischemic crises 
occurring all over the place in people at risk.
Most ischemic episodes turned out to be "silent"—they didn't give a warning signal of pain. Moreover, all sorts of 
psychological stressors could trigger th em, like public speaking, pressured inte rviews, exams. According to the old 
dogma, if you had heart disease, you had better worry when you were undergoing physical stress and getting chest 
pains. Now it appears that, for someone at risk, trouble is occurring under all sorts of circumstances of psychological 
stress in everyday life, and you may no t even know it. Once the cardiovascular system is da maged, it appears to be 
immensely sensitive to acute stressors, whether physical or psychological.
One last bit of bad news. We've been focusing on the st ress-related consequences of activating the cardiovascular 
system too often. What about turning it off at the end of each psychological stressor? As noted earlier, your heart 
slows down as a result of activation of the vagus nerve by  the parasympathetic nervous sy stem. Back to the autonomic 
nervous system never letting you put your foot on the gas and brake at the same time—by definition, if you are 
turning on the sympathetic nervous system all the time, you're chronically shutting off the parasympathetic. And this 
makes it harder to slow things down, even during those rare moments when you're not feeling stressed about 
something.
How can you diagnose a vagus nerve that's not doing its part  to calm down the cardiovascula r system at the end of a 
stressor? A clinician could put someone through a stressor, say, run the person on a treadmill, and then monitor the 
speed of recovery afterward. It turns out that there is a subtler but easie r way of detecting a problem. Whenever you 
inhale, you turn on the sympathetic nervous system slightly, minutely speeding up your heart. And when you exhale, Page 27 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthe parasympathetic half turns on, activating your vagus nerve in order to slow things down (this is why many forms 
of meditation are built around extended exhalations). Theref ore, the length of time betw een heartbeats tends to be 
shorter when you're inhaling than exhaling. But what if chronic stress has blunted the ability of your parasympathetic 
nervous system to kick the vagus nerve into action? When you exhale, your heart won't slow down, won't increase the 
time intervals between beats. Cardiologists use sensitive mo nitors to measure interbeat intervals. Large amounts of 
variability (that is to say, short interbeat intervals during inhalation, long during exhalation) mean you have strong 
parasympathetic tone counteracting your sympathetic tone, a good thing. Minimal variability means a parasympathetic 
component that has trouble putting its foot on the brake. This is th e marker of someone
who not only turns on the cardiovascular stress-response too often but, by now, has trouble turning it off.
SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH
The preceding sections demonstrate how chronic stress will gradually damage the cardiovascular system, with each 
succeeding stressor making the system ev en more vulnerable. But one of the mo st striking and best-known features of 
heart disease is how often that cardiac catastrophe hits during a stressor. A man gets shocking news: his wife has died; 
he's lost his job; a child long thought to be dead appears at the door; he wins the lottery. The man weeps, rants, exults, 
staggers about gasping and hyperventilating with the force of the news. Soon afterward, he suddenly grasps at his 
chest and falls over dead from  sudden cardiac arrest. A str ong, adverse emotion like anger doubles the risk of a heart 
attack during the subsequent two hours. For example, duri ng the O. J. Simpson trial, Bill Hodgman, one of the 
prosecutors, got chest pains around th e twentieth time he jumped up to obj ect to something Johnnie Cochran was 
saying, and collapsed afterward (he survived). This sort of cardiac vulnerability to strong emotions has led Las Vegas 
casinos to keep defibrillators handy. It also is thought to have a lot to do with why exposure to New York City is a 
risk factor for a fatal heart attack.*
The phenomenon is quite well documented. In one study, a physician collected newspaper clippings on sudden 
cardiac death in 170 individuals. He identified a number of ev ents that seemed to be asso ciated with such deaths: the 
collapse, death, or thr eat of loss of someone
* This is for real, as was reported in a widely cited study pu blished in 1999 by Nicholas Christenfeld and colleagues at the Un iversity of California 
at San Diego (what, you were expecting NYU?). The authors did a superb job of ruling out various confounding factors. They show ed that this 
increased risk didn't occur in other urban areas in the country.  It wasn't due to self-selection (i.e., who but stressed, heart  disease-prone crazies 
choose to live in NYC?). It was not a func tion of socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity , or immigrant status. It was not due to  people happening to 
be in NYC at the time of day when people get more heart attacks (i.e., commuters during work hours). It wasn't due to New York doctors having a 
tendency to mislabel other maladies as h eart attacks. Instead, it was most plausibly a function of stress, excitement, fear, an d more disruption of 
sleep/wake cycles than in most other pla ces. And this was before 9/11. Naturally, li ke all the other native New Yorkers I know,  I find this paper to 
be perversely pleasing and affirming.
close; acute grief; loss of status or self-esteem; mourning, on an anniversary; pe rsonal danger; threat  of an injury, or 
recovery from such a threat; triumph or extreme joy. Other studies have shown the same. During the 1991 Persian 
Gulf war fewer deaths in Israel were due to SCUD missi le damage than to sudden cardiac death among frightened 
elderly people. During the 1994 L. A. earthquake, there was similarl y a big jump in heart attacks.*
The actual causes are obviously tough to study (since you can't predict what's going to happen, and you can't 
interview the people afterward to find out what they were feeling), but the general consensus among cardiologists is 
that sudden cardiac death is simply an extreme version of acute stress causing ve ntricular arrhythmia or, even worse, 
ventricular fibrillation plus ischemia in the heart.+ As you would guess, it involves the sympathetic nervous system, 
and it is more likely to happen in damaged heart tissue than in healthy tissue. People can suffer sudden cardiac death 
without a history of heart disease and despite increased blood flow in the coronary vessels; autopsies have generally 
shown, however, that these people had a fair amount of at herosclerosis. Mysterious cases  still occur, however, of 
seemingly healthy thirty-year-olds, victims of sudden car diac death, who show little evidence of atherosclerosis on 
autopsy.
Fibrillation seems to be the cr itical event in sudden cardiac death, as judged  by animal studies (i n which, for example, 
ten hours of stress for a rat makes its heart more vulnerable to fibrillation for days afterward). As one cause, the 
muscle of a diseased heart becomes more electrically excita ble, making it prone to fibrillation. In addition, activation 
of stimulatory inputs to the heart b ecomes disorganized during a massive st ressor. The sympathe tic nervous system 
sends two symmetrical nervous projections to the heart; it is theorized that during extreme emotional arousal, the two 
inputs are activated to such an extent that they become uncoordinated—major fibrillation, clutch your chest, keel over.
* I once received a letter from the chief medi cal examiner of Vermont describing his inve stigation of what he concluded to be a  case of stress-
induced cardiac arrest: an eighty-eight-year-old man with a history of heart disease, lying dead of a heart attack next to his beloved tractor, while 
just outside the house, at an angle where she could have seen him prone in the barn, was his eighty-seven-year-old wife, more r ecently dead of a 
heart attack (but with no history of heart disease and nothing obviously wrong found at autopsy). At her side was the bell she had used to summon 
him to lunch for who knows how many years.
+ Don't panic at the jargon. In ventricular fi brillation the half of your heart called the ventricles begins to contract in a ra pid, disorganized way that 
accomplishes nothing at all in terms of pumping blood.Page 28 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmFATAL PLEASURES
Embedded in the list of categories of precipitants of sudden cardiac death is a particularly interesting one: triumph or 
extreme joy. Consider the scen ario of the man dying in the aftermath of the news of his winning the lottery or the 
proverbial "at least he died happy" instance of someone dying during sex. (When these circumstances apparently 
claimed the life of an ex-vice presiden t a few decades back, the medical minuti ae of the incident received especially 
careful examinatio n because he was not with his wife at the time.)
The possibility of being killed by pleas ure seems crazy. Isn't stress-related dis ease supposed to arise from stress? How 
can joyful experiences kill you in the sa me way that sudden grief does? Clearly because they share some similar traits. 
Extreme anger and extreme joy have diff erent effects on reproductive physiology, on growth, most probably on the 
immune system as well; but with regard to the cardiovascula r system, they have fairly si milar effects. Once again, we 
deal with the central concept of stress physiology in explaining similar responses to being too hot or too cold, a prey 
or a predator: some parts of our body, including the heart, do not care in which direction we are knocked out of 
allostatic balance, but rather simply how much. Thus wa iling and pounding the walls in grief or leaping about and 
shouting in ecstasy can place similarly la rge demands on a diseased heart. Put another way, your sympathetic nervous 
system probably has roughly the same ef fect on your coronary arteries whethe r you are in the mi ddle of a murderous 
rage or a thrilling orgasm. Diametrically opposite emo tions then can have surprisingly similar physiological 
underpinnings (reminding one of the oft-quoted statement by Elie Wiesel, the Nobel laureate writer and Holocaust 
survivor: "The opposite of love is not hate. The oppo site of love is indifference."). When it comes to the 
cardiovascular system, rage and ecstasy , grief and triumph all represent ch allenges to allostatic equilibrium.
WOMEN AND HEART DISEASE
Despite the fact that men have heart attacks at a higher rate  than women, heart disease is  nonetheless the leading cause 
of death among women in the United St ates—500,000 a year (as compared to 40 ,000 deaths a year for breast cancer). 
And the rate is rising among women
while cardiovascular death rates in men have been declining for decades. Moreov er, for the same severity of heart 
attack, women are twice as likely as men to be left disabled.
What are these changes about? The increased  rate of being disabled by a heart a ttack seems to be an epidemiological 
fluke. Women are still less subject to heart attacks than are men, with the onset of vulnerability delayed about a 
decade in women, relative to men. Ther efore, if a man and woman both have h eart attacks of the same severity, the 
woman is statistically likely to be ten y ears older than the man. And because of th is, she is statistically less likely to 
bounce back afterward.
But what about the increasing incidence of  heart disease in women? Various factor s are likely to be contributing to it. 
Obesity is skyrocketing in this country, more so in women, an d this increases the risk of heart disease (as discussed in 
the next chapter). Moreover, th ough smoking rates are declin ing in the country, they are declining more slowly among 
women than men.
Naturally, stress seems to have something to do with it as well. Kaplan and Carol Shively have studied female 
monkeys in dominance hierarchies and observe that animals chronically stuck in subordinate positions have twice the 
atherosclerosis as dominant females, even when on a low-fat diet. Findings with a similar theme of social 
subordination emerge among humans. This  period of increasing rates of cardiovascular disease in women corresponds 
to a time when increasing percentages of women are working outside the home. Could the stressfulness of the latter 
have something to do with the former? Careful studies have  shown that working outside the home does not increase 
the risk of cardiovascular di sease for a woman. Unless she is doing cleri cal work. Or has an unsupportive boss. Go 
figure. And just to show what a myth it is that wo men working outside the home causes a shift toward men 
shouldering more of the burden of work at home, the other predictor of cardiovascular disease for women working 
outside the home is having kids back home.
So why does stress increase the risk of cardiovascular disease in fe male primates, human or otherwise? The answer is 
all the usual suspects—too much sympat hetic nervous system arousal, too much secretion of glucocorticoids. But 
another factor is relevant, one that is wildly controversial, namely estrogen.
At the time of the previous edition of this book, estrogen was boring  news. People had known for decades that 
estrogen protects against cardiovascular di sease (as well as stroke, osteoporosis,  and possibly Alzheimer's disease), 
mostly thanks to estrogen working as an antioxidant, getting rid of damaging oxygen radicals. This explained why
women didn't start to get significant am ounts of heart disease until after estrogen  levels dropped with menopause. This 
was widely known and was one of the rationales for post-menopausal estr ogen replacement therapy.Page 29 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe importance of estrogen in protectin g against cardiovascular disease came no t just from statistics with human 
populations, but from careful experimental studies as well. As will be discussed in chapter 7, stress causes a decline in 
estrogen levels, and Kaplan's low-ranking female monkeys had estrogen levels as low as you would find in a monkey 
that had had her ovaries removed. In contrast, subject a female to years of subordinance but treat her with estrogen, 
raising her levels to those seen in dominant animals, and the atherosclerosis risk disapp ears. And remove the ovaries 
of a high-ranking female, and she was no longer protected from  atherosclerosis. Studies like these seemed definitive.
Then in 2002 came a landmark paper, based on the Women's Health Initiative, a study of  thousands of women. The 
goal had been to assess the effects of eight years of post-menopausal replacement th erapy with estrogen plus 
progestin. The expectation was that this was going to be th e gold-standard demonstration of the protective effects of 
such therapy against cardiovascul ar disease, stroke, and osteop orosis. And five years into it, the codes as to who was 
getting hormone and who placebo were crack ed, and the ethics panel overseeing the mammoth project  brought it to a 
halt. Because the benefits of estrogen plus progestin were  so clear that it was unethi cal to give half the women 
placebo? No—because estrogen pl us progestin was so clearly increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke (while 
still protecting against osteoporosis) that it was unethical to continue the study.
This was a bombshell. Front- page news everywhere. Similar trials were  halted in Europe. Pharmaceutical stocks 
plummeted. And zillions of perimenopausal women wonde red what they were supposed to do about estrogen 
replacement therapy.
Why such contradictory findings, with year s of clinical statistics and careful laboratory studies on one side, and this 
huge and excellent study on the other? As  one important factor, studies like thos e of Kaplan's involv ed estrogen, while 
this clinical trial was about estrogen plus progestin. This could well make a big di fference. Then, as an example of the 
nit-picking that scientists love and which drives everyone else mad, the doses of hormones used probably made a 
difference, as did the type of estrogen (estradiol versus estriol versus estrone, and synthetic versus natural hormone). 
Finally, and this is an important point, the laboratory studies suggest that estrogen protects
against the formation of atherosclerosis, rather than reverses atherosclero sis that is already there. This is quite relevant 
because, given our Western diets, people are probably just starting to form atherosclerotic plaques in their thirties, not 
in their post-menopausal fifties or sixties. The jury is still out on this one. And though it may not turn out that post-
menopausal estrogen protects against cardi ovascular disease, it seems plausibl e that estrogen secreted by women 
themselves at much younger ages does. And stress, by suppressing such estrogen levels, could be contributing to 
cardiovascular disease through that route.
VOODOO DEATH
The time has come to examine a subject fa r too rarely discussed in our public schools. Well-documented examples of 
voodoo death have emerged from all sorts of traditional non-westernized cultures. So meone eats a forbidden food, 
insults the chief, sleeps with someone he or she shouldn't have, does someth ing unacceptably violen t or blasphemous. 
The outraged village calls in a shaman  who waves some ritualistic gewgaw at the transgressor, makes a voodoo doll, 
or in some other way puts a hex on the person. Convincingly soon, the hexed one drops dead.
The Harvard team of ethnobotanist Wade Davis and cardiologist Regis DeSilva reviewed the subject.* Davis and 
DeSilva object to the use of the term voodoo death, since it reeks of West ern condescension toward non-Western 
societies—grass skirts, bones in the nose, an d all that. Instead, th ey prefer the term psychophysiological death, noting 
that in many cases even that term is  probably a misnomer. In some instances, the shaman  may spot people who are 
already very sick and, by claiming to have hexed them, gain brownie points when the person kicks off. Or the shaman 
may simply poison them and gain kudos for his cursing powers. In the confound (that is, the source of confusion) that 
I found most amusing, the sh aman visibly puts a curse on someone, an d the community says, in effect, "Voodoo 
cursing works; this
* Wade Davis is the favorite ethnobotanist of horror movie fans far and wide. As detailed in the reference section, his prior r esearch uncovered a 
possible pharmacological basis of how zombies (people in a death like trance with no will of their own) are made in Haiti. Davis 's Harvard doctoral 
dissertation about zombification was first turned  into a book, The Serpent and the Rainbow, and then a schlocky horror movie of the same name—a 
dream come true for every graduate  student whose thesis is destin ed to be skimmed briefly by a distracted committee member or t wo.
person is a goner, so don't waste good food and water on him." The individual, denied food and water, starves to 
death; another voodoo curse come true, the shaman's fees go up.
Nevertheless, instances of psychophysiological death do occur, and they have been the focus of interest of some great 
physiologists in this century . In a great face-off, Walter  Cannon (the man who came up  with the fight-or-flight 
concept) and Curt Richter (a grand old man of psychosomatic  medicine) differed in thei r postulated mechanisms of 
psychophysiological death. Cannon thought it was due to overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system; in that 
scheme, the person becomes so nervous at  being cursed that the sympathetic syst em kicks into gear and vasoconstricts 
blood vessels to the point of rupturing them, causing a fatal drop in blood pressure. Richter thought death was due to Page 30 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmtoo much parasympathetic activity. In this surprising formul ation, the individual, realizin g the gravity of the curse, 
gives up on some level. The vagus nerve becomes very activ e, slowing the hear t down to the point of stopping—death 
due to what he termed a "vagal stor m." Both Cannon and Richter kept their theories unsullied by never examining 
anyone who had died of psychophysiological death, voodoo or otherwise. It turns out that Cannon was probably right. 
Hearts almost never stop outright in a vagal storm. Inst ead, Davis and DeSilva suggest that these cases are simply 
dramatic versions of sudden cardiac death, with too much  sympathetic tone driving the heart into ischemia and 
fibrillation.
All very interesting, in that it explains why psychophysiological death might occur in individuals who already have 
some degree of cardiac damage. But a puzz ling feature about psychophysiological death in traditional societies is that 
it can also occur in yo ung people who are extremely unlikely to have an y latent cardiac disease. This mystery remains 
unexplained, perhaps implying more silent cardiac risk lurk ing within us than we ever would have guessed, perhaps 
testifying to the power of cultural belief. As Davis and DeSilva note, if faith can heal, faith can also kill.
PERSONALITY AND CARDIAC DISEASE: A BRIEF INTRODUCTION
Two people go through the same stressful social situation. Only one gets hypertensive. Two people go through a decade's worth of li fe's ups and downs. Only one gets cardiovascular disease.
These individual differences could be due to one person already having a damaged cardiovascular system—for 
example, decreased
coronary blood flow. They could also be due to genetic factors that influence the m echanics of the system—the 
elasticity of blood vessels, the numbers of  norepinephrine receptors, and so on. Th ey could be the resu lt of differences 
in how many risk factors each individual experiences—does the person smoke, eat a diet teeming with saturated fats? 
(Interestingly, individual differences in  these risk factors explain less than ha lf the variability in patterns of heart 
disease.)
Faced with similar stressors, whether larg e or small, two people may also differ in their risk for cardiovascular disease 
as a function of their personalities. In chapters 14 and 15 I will review some of these— how the risk of cardiovascular 
disease is increased by hostility, a Type-A personality, an d by clinical depression. The bad news is that these 
personality risk factors are substantial in their impact. But the good news is that something can often be done about 
them.
This discussion has served as the first ex ample of the style of anal ysis that will dominate the coming chapters. In the 
face of a short-term physical emergency, the cardiovascular stress-response is vita l. In the face of chronic stress, those 
same changes are terrible news. These ad verse effects are particular ly deleterious when they interact with the adverse 
consequences of too much of a metabolic stre ss-response, the subject of the next chapter.
4
STRESS, METABOLISM, AND LIQUIDATING YOUR ASSETS
So you're sprinting down the street with the lion after
you. Things looked grim for a moment there, but—your
good luck—your cardiovascular system kicked into gear,
and now it is delivering oxygen and energy to your
exercising muscles. But what  energy? There's not enough
time to consume a candy bar and derive its benefits as you sprint
along; there's not even enough time  to digest food already in the
gut. Your body must ge t energy from its places of storage, like fat or
liver or non-exercising muscle. To understand how you mobilize
energy in this circumstance, and how that mobilization can make youPage 31 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmsick at times, we need to learn ho w the body stores energy in the first
place.
PUTTING ENERGY IN THE BANK
The basic process of digestion consists of breaking down ch unks of animals and vegetables so that they can then be 
transformed into chunks of human. We can't make use of th e chunks exactly as they are;  we can't, for example, make 
our leg muscles stronger by grafting on the piece of chicken muscle we ate. Instead, comp lex food matter is broken 
down into its simplest parts (molecules): amino acids (the building blocks of protein), simple sugars like glucose (the 
building blocks of more complex sugars and of starches [carbohydrates]), and free fatt y acids and glycerol (the 
constituents of fat). This is
accomplished in the gastrointestinal tr act by enzymes, chemical s that can degrade more complex molecules. The 
simple building blocks thus produced are absorbed into th e bloodstream for delivery to whichever cells in the body 
need them. Once you've done that, the cells have the ability to  use those building blocks to construct the proteins, fats, 
and carbohydrates needed to stay in busi ness. And just as important, those simp le building blocks (especially the fatty 
acids and
sugars) can also be burned by the body to provide the energy to do all that construction and to operate those new 
structures afterward.
It's Thanksgiving, and you've eaten with porcine abandon. Your bloodstream is teeming with amino acids, fatty acids, 
glucose. It's far more than you need to power you over to the couch in a pos tprandial daze. What  does your body do 
with the excess? This is crucial to understand because, basi cally, the process gets reversed  when you're later sprinting 
for your life.Page 32 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmTo answer this question, it's time we  talked finances, the works-savings acco unts, change for a dollar, stocks and 
bonds, negative amortization of interest  rates, shaking coins out of piggy bank s— because the process of transporting 
energy through the body bears some striking similarities to the movement of money. It is rare today for the 
grotesquely wealthy to walk aro und with their fortunes in their pockets, or to hoard their wealth as cash stuffed inside 
mattresses. Instead, surplus wealth is stored elsewhere, in forms more comp lex than cash: mutu al funds, tax-free 
government bonds, Swiss bank accounts. In the same way, surplus energy is not kept in the body's form of cash—
circulating amino acids, glucose, and fatty acids—but stor ed in more complex forms.  Enzymes in fat cells can 
combine fatty acids and glycerol to form  triglycerides (see the table on page 60 ). Accumulate enough of these in the 
fat cells and you grow plump. Meanwhile, your cells can stick series of glucose molecules together. These long 
chains, sometimes thousands of gl ucose molecules long, are called glycogen. Most glycogen formation occurs in your 
muscles and liver. Similarly, enzymes in cells throughout the body can combine long strings of amino acids, forming 
them into proteins.
The hormone that stimulat es the transport and storage of these building bloc ks into target cells is insulin. Insulin is 
this optimistic hormone that plans for your metabolic future . Eat a huge meal and insulin pours out of the pancreas 
into the bloodstream, stimulating the tran sport of fatty acids into fat cells, stim ulating glycogen and protein synthesis. 
It's insulin that's filling out the deposit slips at your fat banks. We even secrete insulin when we are about to fill our 
bloodstream with all those nutriti ve building blocks: if you eat dinner each day at six o'cl ock, by five forty-five you're 
already secreting insulin in anticipation of the rising gl ucose levels in your bloodstream. Logically, it is the 
parasympathetic nervous system that st imulates the anticipatory s ecretion, and this ability  to secrete insulin in 
preparation for the glucose levels that ar e about to rise is a great example of the anticipatory quality of allostatic 
balance.
What you stick in your 
mouthHow it winds up in your 
bloodstreamHow it gets stored if you 
have a surplusHow it gets mobilized in 
stressful emergency
Proteins— > Amino acids—> Protein— > Amino acids
Starch, sugars, 
carbohydrates — >Glucose—> Glycogen—> Glucose
Fat—>Fatty acids and glycerol—
>Triglycerides —>Fatty acids, glycerol, ketone 
bodies
EMPTYING THE BANK ACCOUNT:
ENERGY MOBILIZATION DURING A STRESSOR
This grand strategy of breaking your food down into its simplest parts and reconverting it into complex storage forms 
is precisely what your body should do when you've eaten plenty. And it is precisely what your body should not do in 
the face of an immediate phys ical emergency. Then, you want to stop en ergy storage. Turn up the activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system, turn down the parasympathetic, a nd down goes insulin secreti on: step one in meeting an 
emergency accomplished.
The body makes sure that energy storag e is stopped in a second way as we ll. With the onset of the stressful 
emergency, you secrete glucocorticoids, which block the tran sport of nutrients into fat cells. This counteracts the 
effects of any insulin still floating around.
So you've made sure you don't do anything as irrational as store away new energy at this time. But in addition, you 
want your body to gain access to the energy already stored. You want to dip into your bank account, liquidate some of 
your assets, turn stored nutrients into your body's equivalent of cash to get you through this crisis. Your body reverses 
all of the storage steps through the release of the stress hormones glucocorticoids, glucagon, epinephrine, and 
norepinephrine. These cause tr iglycerides to be broken down in the fat ce lls and, as a result, free fatty acids and 
glycerol pour into the circulatory system. The same hormones trigger the degradation of glycogen to glucose in cells 
throughout the body, and the glucose is then flushed into the bloodstream. These hormones also cause protein in non-
exercising muscle to be converted back to individual amino acids.Page 33 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe stored nutrients have now been converted into simpler forms. Your body makes another simplifying move. 
Amino acids are not a very good source of energy, but glucose is. Your body shunts the circulating amino acids to the 
liver, where they are converted to  glucose. The liver can also gene rate new glucose, a process called gluconeogenesis, 
and this glucose is now readily available for energy during the disaster.
As a result of these processes, lots of energy is available to your leg muscles. There's a burst of act ivity; you leave the 
lion in the dust and arrive at the restaurant only a smidgen late for your five forty-five anticipatory insulin secretion.
The scenario I've been outlining is basi cally a strategy to shunt energy from storage sites like fat to muscle during an 
emergency. But it doesn't make adaptive sense to automati cally fuel, say, your arm muscles while you're running 
away from a predator if you happen to be an upright human. It turns out that the body has solved this problem. 
Glucocorticoids and the other hormones of the stress-response also act to block energy uptake into muscles and into 
fat tissue. Somehow the individual muscle s that are exercising during the emer gency have a means to override this 
blockade and to grab all the nutrients floating around in the circulation. The net result is that you shunt energy from 
fat and from non-exercising muscle to the exercising ones.
And what if you can't mobilize energy during a crisis? This is  what occurs in Addison's disease, where people cannot 
secrete adequate amounts of glucocorticoids, or in Shy- Drager syndrome, where it is epinephrine and norepinephrine 
that are inadequate, having an inability to mobilize the body during energetic demands. Obviously, the lion is more 
likely to feast. And in a more subtle scenario, if you li ve in a westernized society and tend to have a somewhat 
underactive stress-response? Just as obviously, you'll have trouble mobilizing energy in response to the demands of 
daily life. And that is precisely what is seen in individuals with chronic fatigue syndrome, which is characterized by, 
among other things, too low levels of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream.
SO WHY DO WE GET SICK?
You most definitely want to have a metabolic stress-response if you're evading a lion, and even if you are doing anything as taxing as walking up a flight of stairs (or even getting up in the morning, the time of day when our 
glucocorticoid levels normally peak). But what about
the more typical scenario for us, one of turning on the stress-response too often, for months on end? We get into 
metabolic trouble for many of the same reasons that consta ntly running to the bank and drawing on your account is a 
foolish way to handle your finances.
On the most basic level, it's inefficien t. Another financial metaphor helps. Suppose you have some extra money and 
decide to put it away for a while in a high-interest account. If you agree not to touch the money for a certain period 
(six months, two years, whatever ), the bank agrees to give you a higher-than-normal rate of interest. And, typically, if 
you request the money earlier, you will pay a penalty for the early withdrawal. Suppose, then, that you happily deposit 
your money on these terms. The next day you develop the fina ncial jitters, withdraw your money, and pay the penalty. 
The day after, you change your mind again, put the money back in, and sign a new agreement, only to change your 
mind again that afternoon, withdraw the money, and pay a nother penalty. Soon you've squandered half your money on 
penalties.
In the same way, every time you store en ergy away from the circulatio n and then return it, you lose a fair chunk of the 
potential energy. It takes energy to shuttle those nutrient s in and out of the bloodstream , to power the enzymes that 
glue them together (into proteins, triglycerides, and glycoge n) and the other enzymes that then break them apart, to 
fuel the liver during that gluconeogenesis trick. In eff ect, you are penalized if you activate the stress-response too 
often: you wind up expending so much energy that, as a first consequence, you tire more readily—just plain old 
everyday fatigue.
As a second consequence, your muscles can waste away, alth ough this rarely happens to a significant degree. Muscle 
is chock-full of proteins. If you are stressed chronically, constantly triggering the breakdown of proteins, your muscles 
never get the chance to rebuild. While they  atrophy ever so slightly  each time your body activ ates this component of 
the stress-response, it requires a really ex traordinary amount of stress for this to happen to a serious extent. As we will 
see in later chapters, sometimes clinicians give patients ma ssive doses of synthetic glucocorticoids. In this scenario, 
significant amounts of myopathy — atrophy of muscle—can occur, of a type similar to that seen in people who are 
bedridden for long periods.
Finally, another problem with constantly mobilizing the meta bolic stress-response was hinted  at in the last chapter. 
You don't want to have tons of fat an d glucose perpetually circulating in your bloodstream because, as we saw, that 
increases the chances of the stuff gl omming on to some damaged blood vessel and worsening atherosclerosis. 
Cholesterol also plays into this. As is well understood, there
is "bad" cholesterol, also known as low-density lipoprot ein-associ-ated cholesterol (L DL) and "good" cholesterol 
(high-density lipopro-tein-associated cholesterol, HDL). LDL-cholesterol is the type that gets added to an Page 34 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmatherosclerotic plaque, whereas HDL-chol esterol is cholesterol that has been removed from plaques and is on its way 
to be degraded in the liver. As a result of this distinc tion, your total level of cholesterol in the bloodstream is not 
actually a meaningful number. You want  to know how much of each  type you have, and lo ts of LDL and minimal 
HDL are independently bad news. We saw in the last chapter that the amount of vascular  inflammation, as measured 
by CRP levels, is the best predictor out there of cardiovascul ar disease risk. Nonetheless, you don't want to have tons 
of LDL-cholesterol floating around and not enough HDL to counteract it. And during stress, you increase LDL-
cholesterol levels and decrease HDL.*
Therefore, if you are stressed too often, the metabolic f eatures of the stress-response  can increase your risks of 
cardiovascular disease. This becomes pa rticularly relevant with diabetes.
JUVENILE DIABETES
There are multiple forms of diab etes, and two are relevant to this chapter. The first is known as juvenile diabetes (or 
type 1, insulin-dependent diabetes). Fo r reasons that are just being sorted ou t, in some people the immune system 
decides that the cells in the pancreas that secrete insulin are, in fact, fo reign invaders and attacks them (such 
"autoimmune" diseases will be discussed in chapter 8). This destroys those cells, leaving the person with little ability 
to secrete insulin. For equally mysterious  reasons, this tends to hit people relatively early in life (hence the "juvenile" 
part of the name) although, to add to th e mystery, in recent decades, the rate at  which adults, even middle-aged adults, 
are getting diagnosed with juvenile diabetes is climbing.
Because the person can no longer secrete adequate amounts of insuli n (if any), there is little  ability to promote the 
uptake of glucose (and, indirectly, fatty acids) into target cells. Cells starve—big trouble,
* So it can be bad news to frequently boos t LDL levels because of frequent stressors . But, independent from that, it is also no t a good sign if, for 
any given stressor, you have a particularly large LDL increase. Studies have shown that the offsprin g of people with heart disease tend to have 
atypically large LDL responses to st ress, suggesting a vulnerab ility factor that has been passed on to them.
not enough energy, organs don't function ri ght. In addition, there's now all that glucose and fatty acid circulating in the 
bloodstream-oleaginous h oodlums with no place to go, and soon there's atheroscleroti c trouble there as well. The 
circulating stuff gums up the blood vessels in the kidneys,  causing them to fail. The same can occur in the eyes, 
causing blindness. Blood vessels elsewhere in the body are clogged, causing little strokes in those tissues and, often, 
chronic pain. With enough glucose in the circulation, it begins to stick to proteins, begins to Velcro proteins together 
that have no business being connected, knocking them out of business. None of this good.
And what is the best way to manage insulin-dependent diabetes? As we all know, by accomm odating that dependency 
with insulin injections. If you're diabetic, you never want  your insulin levels to get too low—cells are deprived of 
energy, circulating glucose levels get too high. But you don't want to take too much insulin. For complex reasons, this 
deprives the brain of energy, potentially putting you into shock or a coma and damaging neurons. The better the 
metabolic control in a diabetic, the fewer the complications and the longer the life exp ectancy. Thus, there's a major 
task for this type of diabetic to keep things just right, to  keep food intake and insulin dos ages balanced with respect to 
activity, fatigue, and so on. And this is  an area where there has been extraordinary techno logical progress enabling 
diabetics to monitor blood glucose levels minute by minute and make minuscule changes in insulin dosages 
accordingly.
How does chronic stress affect th is process? First, the hormones of the st ress-response cause ev en more glucose and 
fatty acids to be mobilized into the bloodstream. For a juvenile diabetic, this increases the likelihood of the now-
familiar pathologies of glucose and fa tty acids gumming up in the wrong places.
Another, more subtle problem occurs with chronic stress as well. When something stressful happens, you don't just 
block insulin secretion. Basically, the brai n doesn't quite trust the pancreas not to keep secreting a little insulin, so a 
second step occurs. As noted earlier, du ring stress, glucocorticoids act on fat cells throughout the body to make them 
less sensitive to insulin, just in case there's some still floating around. Fat cells then rel ease some newly discovered 
hormones that get other tissues, like muscle and liver, to stop responding to insulin as well. Stress promotes insulin 
resistance. (And when people get into this diabetic state because they ar e taking large amounts of synthetic 
glucocorticoids [to control any of a variety of diseases that will be discussed later in the book] they have succumbed 
to "steroid diabetes.")
Why is this stress-induced insulin resistance bad for someon e with juvenile diabetes? Th ey have everything nice and 
balanced, with a healthy diet, a good sensitivity to their body's signals as to when a little insulin needs to be injected, 
and so on. But throw in some chronic stress, and suddenly insulin doesn't work quite as well, causing people to feel 
terrible until they figure out that they need to inject more of the stuff... which can make cells even more resistant to 
insulin, spi-raling the insulin requirements upward ... until the pe riod of stress is over with, at which point it's not clear 
when to start getting the insuli n dose down ... because different parts of the body regain their in sulin sensitivity at 
different rates.... The perfectly bala nced system is completely upended.Page 35 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmStress, including psychological stress, can wreak havoc wi th metabolic control in a juvenile diabetic. In one 
demonstration of this, diabetics were exposed to an experimental stressor (speaking in public) and their glucocorticoid 
secretion was monitored. Those who tended to have the la rgest stress-response under th ose circumstances were the 
ones least likely to have their diabet es well controlled. Moreover, in related studies, those who had the strongest 
emotional reactions to an experimental stressor tended to have the highest blood glucose levels.
Stress may sneak in another way. Some car eful studies have shown higher rates of major stressors suffered by people 
during the three years before the onset of their juvenile diab etes than would be expected by chance. Does this mean 
that stress can make the immune system more likely to attack the pancreas? Th ere is a little bit of evidence for this, 
which will be discussed in chapter 8 on immunity. A more likely explanation is built ar ound the fact that once the 
immune system begins to attack the pancreas (that is, once the diabetes has started), it takes a while before the 
symptoms become apparent. By having al l the adverse effects just talked about,  stress can speed up the whole process, 
making the person notice sooner that he or she is just not feeling right.
Thus, frequent stress and/or big stress-responses might in crease the odds of getting juve nile diabetes, accelerate the 
development of the diabetes, and, once it  is established, cause major complicati ons in this life-shortening disease.* 
Therefore, this is a population in which successful stress management is critical.
* A major challenge for diabetologists in thei r attempt to keep the disease under contro l in their patients is that juvenile di abetes is often occurring 
in juveniles who stress their system by beha ving in ways that are, well, juvenile. Ea ting the wrong things, skipping meals, not  getting enough sleep. 
A major management headache.
ADULT-ONSET DIABETES
In adult-onset diabetes (type 2, non-insulin-dependent diabetes ), the trouble is not too little insulin, but the failure of 
the cells to respond to insulin. Another name for the disorder is thus insulin- resistant diabetes. The problem here 
arises with the tendency of many people to put on weight as they age. (However, if people do not put on weight as 
they age, they show no increas ed risk of this disease. This is the case among people in non-westernized populations. 
The disease is not, therefore, a normal feature of aging; in stead, it is a disease of inactiv ity and fat surplus, conditions 
that just happen to be more common with  age in some societies.) With enough fa t stored away, the fat cells essentially 
get full; once you are an adolescent, the number of fat cells you have is fixed, so if you put on weight, the individual 
fat cells are distended. Yet another heav y meal, a burst of insulin trying to prom ote more fat storage by the fat cells, 
and the fat cells refuse—"Tough luck, I don't care if you are in sulin; we're completely full." No room at the inn. The 
fat cells become less responsive to insulin trying to promote more fat storage, and less glucose is taken up by these 
cells.* The overstuffed fat cells even release hormones that trigger other fat cells and muscle into becoming insulin 
resistant.
Do the cells now starve? Of course not, the abundant amounts of fat stored in them was th e source of the trouble in the 
first place. The body gets into trouble b ecause of all that circulating glucose and fatty acids, damaging blood vessels. 
Same old problem. And if the adult-onset diabetes goes on for a while, an additional, miserable development can 
occur. Your body has become insulin-resistant. Your pancr eas responds by secreting even more insulin than usual. 
You're still resistant. So th e pancreas secretes even more . Back and forth, your pancre as pumping out ever higher 
levels of insulin, trying to be heard.  Eventually, this burns out the insulin- secreting cells in the pancreas, actually 
destroying them. So you finally get your adult-onset diabetes  under control, thanks to losing weight and exercising, 
and you discover you've now got juvenile diabetes, thanks to that damage to your pancreas.
* The careful reader may be confused at this point—if insulin regulates glucose uptake, why does it influence the amount of fat  being stored in fat 
cells? For immensely complex reasons that I once understood for a few hours for a fina l exam, the storage of fat as triglycerid es requires glucose 
uptake.Page 36 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmPhotomicrograph of bloated fat cells.
How does chronic stress affect adult-onset diabetes? Once agai n, constantly mobilizing glucose and fatty acids into 
the bloodstream adds to the atherosclerotic glomming. And there's that problem of the stress-response involving your 
fat cells being instructed to become less responsive to insulin. Suppose that you're in your sixties, overweight, and just 
on the edge of insulin resistance. Along comes a period of chronic stress with those stre ss hormones repeatedly telling 
your cells what a great idea it is to be insulin-resistant. Enough of this and you pass the threshold for becoming 
overtly diabetic.
Why is any of this worth paying attent ion to? Because there is a worldwide epidemic of adul t-onset diabetes going on, 
especially in our country. As of 1990, about 15 percent of Americans over age sixty-fi ve had adult-onset diabetes. 
That was considered a health disaster then. As of a decade later,  there's been a 33 percen t increase above that, and 
among middle-aged adults as well. And this disease of agi ng is suddenly hitting far younger people as well—in the 
last decade, there's been a 70 percent in crease in its incidence amon g thirty-year-olds.  In addition, so mething like 20 
million Americans are "pre-diabetic"—b arreling toward a formal diagnosis. Ad ult-onset diabetes has even become 
more prevalent among kids than juvenile diabetes, which is pretty horrifying. Moreover, as people in the developing 
world are first being exposed to westernized diets, not only do they develop
diabetes, they develop it at a faster rate than do westerners, for reasons that are probably both cultural and genetic. 
This once nonexistent disease afflicts an estimated 300 mi llion people worldwide and killed 200,000 Americans last 
year.
What's this about? It's obvious. Despite the impr ession that everyone spe nds their days eating low-
fat/carb/cholesterol/cardboard diets and power walking uphill while loudly reciting the writings of Atkins or Ornish, 
with each passing year, we are eating mo re food—more junk food—and exercising less. Tw enty percent of Americans 
are now technically "obese" (versus 12 pe rcent in 1990), and 54 perc ent are "overweight" (versu s 44 percent then). To 
paraphrase the allostasis theorist Joseph Ey er, prosperity has become a cause of death.*
METABOLIC SYNDROME/SYNDROME X
In the well-entrenched tradition of medi cal compartmentalizing, ther e's a whole set of things that can go wrong in you 
that would get you sent to a cardiologist, whereas a bunch of different problems would get you turfed to an internal 
medicine doc who specializes in diabet es. With any luck, they'd even confer  with each other now and then. What 
should be obvious over the last two chapters is that your metabolic and cardiovas cular systems are intimately 
interconnected. "Metabolic s yndrome" (also known as Syndrome X) is a new term recognizing this interconnection. 
It's actually not so new, having been formalized in the late  1980s by Gerald Reaven of Stanford University. It's just 
become tremendously trendy in the past few years (so trendy that it's even b een described in a population of wild 
baboons who forage through the desserts in a garbage dump at a tourist lodge in East Africa).
* If you learned your physiology sitting on the knee of Walter Cannon, none of this makes sense: "What's the deal with our bodi es gaining all this 
weight, what happened to that 'Wisdom of the body' business?" you would ask. Peter Ster ling points out that if the body worked by classical 
homeostatic principles of low-leve l, local feedback control, adult-onset diabetes shouldn't exist. It would be avoided with a s imple regulatory 
issue—put on a certain amount of  weight and fat cells tell appetite centers in the brain to stop being hungry. But it doesn't w ork that way—as we 
collectively keep putting on more weight, we collectively keep getting hungrier. St erling points out the allo-static fact that there is a lot more to 
regulating appetite than simply how  much fat you have stored, and that all sort s of higher level factors, including numerous so cietal ones, tend to 
override the efforts of fat cells to decrease a ppetite. This will be returned to in chapter 16.Page 37 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmMake a list of some of the things that can go wrong from th e last two chapters: elevated insulin levels in the blood. 
Elevated glucose levels. Elevated systo lic and diastolic blood pressure. Insulin resistance. Too much  LDL-cholesterol. 
Too little HDL. Too much fat or cholesterol in the blood. Suffer from a subset of thes e, and you've got Metabolic 
syndrome (the formal diagnosis involves "one or more" from  a list of some of these problems, and "two or more" 
from a list of the others).* The syndrome-ness is a way of st ating that if you have a subset of those symptoms, you're 
probably heading toward the rest of th em, since they're all one or  two steps away from each other. Have elevated 
insulin levels, low HDL, and abdominal obe sity and the chances are pr etty good you're going to get insulin resistance. 
Elevated LDL-cholesterol, high blood pressure, and insulin resistance, and you're likely to be obese soon. Another 
bunch and they predict hypertension.
Subsets of these clusters of traits not  only predict each other, they collectiv ely predict major disease outcomes, like 
heart attacks or stroke, and mortality rates. This was shown with particul ar subtlety in an impressive study carried out 
by a team headed by Teresa Seeman of  UCLA. Medicine normally works in diagnostic categories: have glucose levels 
above X, and it's official, you have hyperglycemia. Have blood pressure levels above Z, you're hypertensive. But how 
about if your glucose levels, blood pressure, HDL-cholesterol, and so on, are all in the normal range, but all of them 
are getting near the edge of where you have to start worrying? In othe r words, no measure is abnormal, but there's an 
abnormally large number of meas ures that are almost abnormal. Technically, nothing is wrong, amid it being obvious 
that things are not right. Take more than a thousand study subjects, all over age seventy, none of whom are certifiably 
sick—that is to say, where none of t hose measures are technically abnormal. No w, see how they're doing on all those 
Metabolic syndrome measures. Th row in some other measures as well—inclu ding resting levels of glucocorticoids, 
epinephrine, norepinephrine. Combine the insights into th ese measures mathematically  and, collect ively, this 
information was significantly predictive of who was going to have heart disease, a decline in cognitive or physical 
functioning, and mortality, far more predictive than subsets of those variables alone.
This is the essence of that "allostasis" concept, of keeping things in balance through interactions among different, far-
flung systems in the
* I'm being a bit vague here beca use there doesn't seem to be a consensus, as far as I can tell, as to which are the exact set of 
symptoms to choose from to diagnose Metabolic syndrome.
body. This is also the essence of the w ear-and-tear concept of allostatic "load, " a formal demonstration that even if 
there's no single measure that's  certifiably wrong, if there are enough things that are not quite right, you're in trouble. 
And, as the final, obvious point, this is also the essence of what stress does. No single  disastrous effect, no lone 
gunman. Instead, kicking and poking and impeding, here and th ere, make this a bit worse,  that a bit less effective. 
Thus making it more likely for the roof to cave in at some point.
5
ULCERS, THE RUNS, AN D HOT FUDGE SUNDAES
Not having enough food or water definitely counts as a
stressor. If you're a human, having enough food and
water for this meal, but not being sure where the next
meal is coming from is a ma jor stressor as well, one of
the defining experiences of life outside the westernized
world. And choosing not to eat to the point of starvation—anorexia—is
a stressor as well (and one with an  odd endocrine signature, harking
back to chapter 2, in that glucocor ticoids tend to be elevated while the
sympathetic nervous system is unexpectedly inhibited). None of this is
surprising. Nor is it surprising that  stress changes eating patterns. ThisPage 38 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmis well established. The questi on, of course, is in what way.
STRESS AND FOOD CONSUMPTION
From the previous chapter it's  perfectly obvious where we're heading in te rms of appetite. You're the zebra running for 
your life, don't think about lunch. That's the reason why we  lose our appetites when we'r e stressed. Except for those of 
us who, when stressed, eat everything  in sight, in a mindless mechanical way. And those who claim they're not 
hungry, are too stressed to eat a thing, and just happen to ni bble 3,000 calories' worth of food a day. And those of us 
who really can't eat a thing. Except for chocolate-choc olate chip hot fudge sundaes. With whipped cream and nuts. 
The official numbers are that stress makes about two-thirds of people hyperphagic (eating more) and the rest
hypophagic* Weirdly, when you stress lab rats, you get the same confusing picture, where some become hyperphagic, 
others hypophagic. So we can conclude wi th scientific certainty that stress can alter appetite. Which doesn't teach us a 
whole lot, since it doesn't tell us wh ether there's an increase or decrease.
It turns out that there are ways to explain why some of us become hyper- and others hypophagic during stress. To 
start, we extend the zebra s cenario to the point of it surviving its enco unter. During the stresso r, appetite and energy 
storage were suppressed, and stored energy was mobilized. Thus, what's th e logic during the post-stress period? 
Obvious—recover from that, reverse th ose processes. Block the energy mobilization, store the nutrients in your 
bloodstream, and get more of them. Appetite goes up.
This is accomplished through some endocri nology that is initially fairly confusi ng, but is actually r eally elegant. The 
confusing issue is that one of the critical hormones of the stress-response st imulates appetite, while another inhibits it. 
You might recall from earli er chapters that the hormone CRH  is released by the hypothal amus and, by stimulating the 
pituitary to release ACTH, star ts the cascade of events that culminates in adrenal release of glucocorticoids. Evolution 
has allowed the development of efficient use of the body's ch emical messengers, and CRH is  no exception. It is also 
used in parts of the brain to regulate other features of the stress-response. It helps to turn on the sympathetic nervous 
system, and it plays a role in increasing vigilance and arousal during stress.  It also suppresses appetite. (Unsuccessful 
dieters should be warned against running to the neighborhood pharmacist for a bottle of CRH. It will probably help 
you lose weight, but you'll feel awful—as if you were always in the middle of an anxiety-provoking emergency: your 
heart racing; feeling jumpy, hyposexua l, irritable. Probably better to just opt for a few more sit-ups.)
On the other side of the picture are glucocorticoids. In addition to the actions already outlined in response to stress, 
they appear to stimulate appetite. This  is typically demonstrated in rats: gl ucocorticoids make these animals more 
willing to run mazes looking fo r food, more willing to press a lever fo r a food pellet, and so on. The hormone 
stimulates appetite in humans as well (although, to my knowledge, no one
* The jury remains out as to whether the folks who become hyperphagic after stress al so develop a specific craving for carbohyd rates. Clinical lore 
supports this picture, as do so me laboratory studies. However,  there's a problem here, which is that high-carb foods are typica lly easier to eat than 
low-carb foods, since the former tend to be snacks. So it's not clear if people really get a craving for carbohydrates, or if t hey get a craving for easy, 
mindless eating.
has stoked human volunteers on glucocorticoids and then qu antified them scurrying up and down supermarket aisles). 
Scientists have a reasonably good idea where in the brain glucocorticoids stimulate appetite, which type of 
glucocorticoid receptors are involved, and so on.* What is really fascinating is that gluc ocorticoids don't just stimulate 
appetite—they stimulate it pref erentially for foods that are st archy, sugary, or full of fa t—and we reach for the Oreos 
and not the celery sticks.
Thus, we appear to have a problem here. CRH inhibits appetite, glucocorticoids do the opposite.+ Yet they are both 
hormones secreted during stress.  Timing turns out to be critical. When a stre ssful event occurs, ther e is a burst of CRH 
secretion within a few seconds. ACTH levels take about fi fteen seconds to go up, while it takes many minutes for 
glucocorticoid levels to surge in the bloodstream (dependi ng on the species). Thus, CRH is the fastest wave of the 
adrenal cascade, glucocorticoids the slowes t. This difference in time course is al so seen in the speed at which these 
hormones work on various parts of the body. CRH makes its effects felt within seconds, while glucocorticoids take 
minutes to hours to exert their actions. Finally, when the st ressful event is over, it takes mere seconds for CRH to be 
cleared from the bloodstream, while it can take  hours for glucocorticoids to be cleared.
Therefore, if there are large amounts of CRH in your bloodstream, yet almost no glucocorticoids, it is a safe bet that 
you are in the first few minutes of a st ressful event. Good time to turn off ap petite, and the combination of high CRH 
and low glucocorticoid s accomplishes that.
Next, if there are large amounts of CRH and glucocorticoids in the bloodstream, you are probably in the middle of a 
sustained stressor. Also a good time to have appetite suppresse d. You can pull this off only if the appetite-suppressing 
effects of CRH are stronger than the a ppetite-stimulating effects of glucocorticoids. And that's exactly how it works.Page 39 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmFinally, if there are substantial amounts of glucocorticoids in the circulation but little CRH, you have probably started 
the recovery period. That's exactly when digestion starts up again and your body
* The effect involves a recently discovere d hormone called leptin. Very full fat cells secrete a lot of leptin, which works in the brain to decrease 
appetite. This fact caused entrep reneurial hysteria a while back, with all sorts of pharmaceutical companies thinking that givi ng people leptin was 
going to be the perfect diet drug. Hasn't  worked, for some r eason. In any case, glucocorticoids  make the brain less sensitive t o leptin, blunting its 
satiation signal. So you eat more.
+ Beta-endorphins, released during stre ss, also increase appetite, but we're go ing to ignore that for the moment.
can begin to replenish those stores of energy consumed in th at mad dash across the savanna.  Appetite is stimulated. In 
chapter 4, we saw how glucocorticoids help to empty out the bank account of stored energy during a stressor. In this 
case, glucocorticoids would not so mu ch serve as the mediator of the st ress-response, but as the means of recovering 
from the stress-response.
Things now begin to make sense when you consider both the duration of a stressor and the recovery period combined. 
Suppose that something truly stressful occurs, and a maxi mal signal to secrete CRH, AC TH, and glucocorticoids is 
initiated. If the stressor ends after, sa y, ten minutes, there will cumulatively be perhaps a twelve-minute burst of CRH 
exposure (ten minutes during th e stressor, plus the seconds it takes to cl ear the CRH afterward) and a two-hour burst 
of exposure to glucocorticoids (the roughly eight minutes of secretion during the stressor plus the much longer time to 
clear the glucocorticoids). So the period where glucocortic oid levels are high and thos e of CRH are low is much 
longer than the period of CRH levels being high. A situation that winds up stimulating appetite.
In contrast, suppose the stressor lasts for days, nonstop. In other words, days of elevated CRH and glucocorticoids, 
followed by a few hours of high glucocorticoids and low CRH, as the system recovers. The sort of setting where the 
most likely outcome is suppression of appetite.
The type of stressor is key to whether the net result is hyper- or hypophagia. Take so me crazed, maze-running rat of a 
human. He sleeps through the alarm clock first thing in the morning, total panic. Calms down when it looks like the 
commute isn't so bad today, maybe he won't be late for work  after all. Gets panicked al l over again when the commute 
then turns awful. Calms down at work when it looks like th e boss is away for the day and she didn't notice he was late. 
Panics all over again when it becomes clear the boss is there and did notice. So it goes throughout the day. And how 
would that person describe his life? "I am like, SO stressed, like totally, nonstop stressed, 24/7." But that's not really 
like totally nonstop stressed. Take a whole body burn. That's like totally nonstop stressed, 24/7. What this first person 
is actually experiencing is frequent intermittent stressors. And what's going on hormona lly in that scenario? Frequent 
bursts of CRH release through out the day. As a result of th e slow speed at which glucocor ticoids are clear ed from the 
circulation, elevated glucocor ticoid levels are close to n onstop. Guess who's going to be scarfing up Krispy Kremes 
all day at work?
So a big reason why most of us become hyperphagic during stress is our westernized human capacity to have 
intermittent psychological stressors throughout the day. The type of stressor is a big factor.
Another variable that helps predict hyperphagia or hypophagia during stress is how your body responds to a particular 
stressor. Put a bunch of subjects through the same experime ntal stressor (for example, a session on an exercise 
bicycle, a time-pressured set of math questions, or having to speak in public) and, not surprisingly, not everyone 
secretes the exact same amount of gluc ocorticoids. Furthermore, at the end of the stressor, everyone's glucocorticoid 
levels don't return to baseline at the same rate. The sources  of these individual differen ces can be psychological—the 
experimental stressor may be an utter misery for one person  and no big deal for another.  Differences can also arise 
from physiology—one person's liver may be pokier at breaking down glucocorticoids than the next person's.
Elissa Epel of UCSF has shown that the glucocorticoid hyper-secreters are the ones most likely to be hyperphagic 
after stress. Moreover, when given an array of foods to choose  from during the post-stress period, they also atypically 
crave sweets. This is an eff ect that is specific to stress. The people wh o secrete excess glucocorticoids during stress 
don't eat any more than the other subj ects in the absence of stress, and th eir resting, non-stressed levels of 
glucocorticoids aren't any higher than the others.
What else separates the stress hyperphagics from the stress hypo-phagics? Some of it has to do with your attitude 
toward eating. Lots of people eat not just out of nutritional need, but out of emotional need as well. These folks tend 
both to be overweight and to be stress-eaters. In addition, th ere's a fascinating literature concerning the majority of us, 
for whom eating is a regulated, disciplined task. At any given point, about two-thirds of us are "restrained" eaters. 
These are people who are actively trying  to diet, who would agree with stat ements like, "In a typical meal, I'm 
conscious of trying to restrict the amount of food that I consume." Mind you, these are not people who are necessarily 
overweight. Plenty of heavy people are not dieting, plenty  of everyone else is at any point. Restrained eaters are 
actively restricting their food intake. What the studies consistently show is that during stress, people who are normally 
restrained eaters are more likely th an others to become hyperphagic.Page 40 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThis makes lots of sense. Things are a bit stressful—cor porate thugs have looted your  retirement savings, there's 
anthrax in the mail, and you've realized that you hate how your hair looks. That's exactly the
Mark Daughhetee, The Sin of Gluttony, oil on silver print, 1985.
time when most people decide  that, as a coping device, as a means of be ing nice to themselves during a tough time, 
they need to ease up on something abou t which they're normally pretty regimented. So if you normally force yourself 
to watch Masterpiece Theater instead of reality TV as some sort of gesture of self-improvement, on goes Survivor XII. 
And if it's food intake that you're normally regimented about, out come the fudge brownies.
So we differ as to whether stress stimulates or inhibits our  appetite, and this has something to do with the type and 
pattern of stressors, how reactive our glucocorticoid system is to stress, and whether eating is normally something that 
we keep a tight, superegoish lid on. It turns out that we also differ as to how readily  we store food away after a 
stressor. And where in the body we store it.
APPLES AND PEARS
Glucocorticoids not only increase appeti te but, as an additional  means to recover from the stress-response, also 
increase the storage of that ingested fo od. Mobilize all that energy  during that mad dash across the savanna, and you're 
going to have to do a lot of energy storage during
your recovery period. In order to have this effect, glucocorticoids trigger fat cells to make an enyzme that breaks 
down the circulating nutrients in to their storage forms, ideal fo r storing them for next winter.
It's not just any fat cells that glucoc orticoids stimulate. Time for one of the great dichotomies revered by fat cell 
aficionados: fat cells located in your ab dominal area, around your belly, are known as "visceral" fat. Fill up those fat 
cells with fat, without depositing much fat elsewhere in your body, and you take on an "apple" shape.
In contrast, fat cells around your rear end form "gluteal" fat. Fill those up preferentially  with fat and you take on a 
"pear" shape, being round-bottomed. The fo rmal way to quantify these different types of fat deposition is to measure 
the circumference of your waist (which tells you about the amount of abdominal fat) and the circumference of your 
hips (a measure of gluteal fat). Apples have waists that are bigger than hips, producing a "waist-hip ratio" (WHR) that 
is bigger than 1.0, while pears have hips that are bigger than waists, pr oducing a WHR that is less than 1.0.
It turns out that when glucocorticoids stimulate fat deposi tion, they do it preferentially in the abdomen, promoting 
apple-shaped obesity. This ev en occurs in monkeys. The pa ttern arises because abdominal fat cells are more sensitive 
to glucocorticoids than are gluteal fat cells; the former have more recep tors that respond to  glucocorticoids by 
activating those fat-storing enzymes. Furthermore, glucocortico ids only do this in the presence of high insulin levels. 
And once again, this makes sense. What do es it mean if you have high glucocorticoid levels and low insulin levels in 
the bloodstream? As we know from chapter 4, you're in the middle of a stressor. High glucocorticoids and high 
insulin? This happens during the recovery  phase. Pack away those calories to  recover from the grassland sprint.Page 41 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThis stimulation of visceral fa t deposition by glucocorticoids is not good news . This is because if you have to pack on 
some fat, you definitely want to become  a pear, not an apple. As we saw in the chapter on metabolism, lots of fat is a 
predictor for Syndrome X. But it turns out that a large WHR is an even better pred ictor of trouble than being 
overweight is. Take some extremely ap plish people and some very peary ones. Match them for weight, and it's the 
apples who are at risk for me tabolic and cardiovascular disease. Among othe r reasons, this is probably because fat 
released from abdominal fat cells more readily finds its way to the liver (in contrast to fat from gluteal fat stores, 
which gets dispersed more equally throughout the body), where it is converted into glucose, setting you up for 
elevated blood sugar and insulin resistance.
These findings lead to a simple prediction, namely that  for the same stressor, if you tend to secrete more 
glucocorticoids than most, not only are you going to have a bigger appetite post-stressor, you're going to go apple, 
preferentially socking aw ay more of those calories in your abdominal fa t cells. And that's precise ly what occurs. Epel 
has studied this in women and men across a range of ages, and she finds that a prolonged glucocorticoid response to 
novelty is a feature of applish people, not pears.
So with lots of stress, you get cravings for starchy comfort food and you pack it in the abdomen. One final distressing 
piece of information, based on some fascinating recent work by Mary Dallma n from the University of California at 
San Francisco: consuming lots of those comfort foods and bulking up on abdominal fat are stress-reducers. They tend 
to decrease the size of the stress-respon se (both in terms of glucocorticoid secretion and sympathetic nervous system 
activity). Not only do the Oreos taste good, but by reducing the stress-response, they make you feel good as well.
There seems to be a huge number of routes by which obe sity can occur—too much or too little of this or that 
hormone; too much or too little sensitivity to this or that hormone.* But another route appears to involve being the 
sort of person who secretes too many  glucocorticoids, either because of to o many stressors, too many perceived 
stressors, or trouble turning off the stress-response. A nd thanks to that weird new regulatory loop discovered by 
Dallman, it appears as if abdominal fat is one route for trying to tone down that overactive stress-response.
BOWEL MOVEMENT
AND BOWEL MOVEMENTS
Thanks to the preceding part of this ch apter and to chapter 4, we've now sorted  out how stress alters  what you ingest, 
how it gets stored and mobilized. We have one last piece to fill in, which is getting food from your mouth to its 
digested form in your circulation. This is the
* The hormones involved obviously include the ones we've already heard of, like insulin, leptin, CRH, and glucocorticoids, plus  other players like 
growth hormone, estrogen, and te stosterone. But there's also an  array of brand-new appetite-rela ted hormones and neurotransmitt ers with names 
that are so hideous that I have no choice but to bury them in a footnote. Neuropeptide Y. C holecystokinin. Melanocyte-stimulati ng hormone. 
Oleylethanolamide. Adipon ectin. Hypocretin. Agouti-related pr otein. Ghrelin (yes, that's actua lly how you spell it; however, I have no idea how 
you pronounce it).
purview of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract—your esophagus, stomach, small intestines and large intestines (also known 
as the colon or the bowel).
When it comes to your GI tract, there's no such thing as a free lunch. You' ve just finished some feast, eaten like a 
hog—slabs of turkey, somebody's grandm a's famous mashed potatoes and gravy,  a bare minimum of vegetables to 
give a semblance of healthiness, and—oh, why not— anothe r drumstick and some corn on the cob, a slice or two of 
pie for dessert, ad nauseam. You expect your gut to magically convert all that into a filtrate of nutrients in your 
bloodstream? It takes energy huge amounts of it. Muscular work. Your stomach not only breaks down food 
chemically, it does so mechanically as we ll. It undergoes systolic contractions: the muscle walls contract violently on 
one side of your stomach, and hunks of food are flung against the far wall, breaking them down in a cauldron of acids 
and enzymes. Your small intes tines do a snake dance of peristalsis (directio nal contraction), cont racting the muscular 
walls at the top end in order to squeeze th e food downstream in time  for the next stretch of muscle to contract. After 
that, your bowels do the same, and you're destined for the bathroom soon. Circular muscles called sphincters located 
at the beginning and end of each organ op en and close, serving as locks to make  sure that things don't move to the 
next level in the system until the previous stage of digesti on is complete, a process no less complicated than shuttling 
ships through the locks of the Panama Canal. At your mout h, stomach, and small intestines, water has to be poured 
into the system to keep everything in solution, to make sure that the sweet potato pie, or what's left of it, doesn't turn 
into a dry plug. By this time, the action has moved to your large intestines, which have to extract the water and return 
it to your bloodstream so that you don't inadvertently excrete all that fluid and desiccate like a prune. All this takes 
energy, and we haven't even considered jaw fatigue. All told, your run-of-the-mill mammals, including us, expend 10 
to 20 percent of their energy on digestion.
So back to our by-now-familiar drama on  the savanna: if you are that zebra being pursued by a lion, you can't waste 
energy on your stomach walls doing a rumba. There isn't time  to get any nutritional benefi ts from digestion. And if 
you are that lion running after a meal, you haven't just staggered up from some all-you-can-eat buffet.Page 42 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmDigestion is quickly shut down during stress. We all know the first step in that process. If you get nervous, you stop 
secreting saliva and your mouth gets dry. Your stomach gr inds to a halt, contractions  stop, enzymes and digestive 
acids are no longer secr eted, your small intestines stop peristalsis, nothing is absorbed. The rest of your body
even knows that the digestive tract has been shut down—as we saw two chapters ago, blood flow to your stomach and 
gut is decreased so that the blood-borne oxygen and gluc ose can be delivered elsewher e, where they're needed. The 
parasympathetic nervous system, perfect for all that calm, vegetative physiology , normally mediates the actions of 
digestion. Along comes stress: turn off the parasympathetic,  turn on the sympathetic, and forget about digestion.* End 
of stress; switch gears again, an d the digestive process resumes.
As usual, this all makes wonderful sense for the zebra or the lion. An d as usual, it is in the face of chronic stress that 
diseases emerge instead.
BOWELS IN AN UPROAR
Regardless of how stressful that board meeting or examinatio n is, we're not likely to soil our pants. Nevertheless, we 
are all aware of the tendency of immens ely terrified people—for example, sold iers amid horrifying battle—to defecate 
spontaneously. (This reaction is consistent enough that in many states, prisoners are clothed in diapers before an 
execution.)
The logic as to why this occurs is similar to why we lose  control of our bladders if we are very frightened, as 
described in chapter 3. Most of digestion is a strategy to get your mouth, stomach, bile ducts, and so forth to work 
together to break your food  down into its constituent parts by the time it reaches th e small intestines. The small 
intestines, in turn, are responsible for absorbing nutrients out of this mess and delivering them to the bloodstream. As 
is apparent to most of us, not much of what we eat is act ually nutritious, and a large percentage of what we consume is 
left over after the small intestines pick  through it. In the large intestines, the leftovers are converted to feces and 
eventually exit  stage left.
Yet again, you sprint across the veld. All that stuff sitting in your large intestines, from which the nutritive potential 
has already been absorbed, is  just dead weight. You have  the choice of sprinting for
* Back to stress turning off salivation, an  inhibition mediated by the sympathetic nervous system. What if you have to salivate  for a living, if you 
are, say, an oboe player? Big audition comes along, good and nervous and—disaster—no spittle. Thus, many r eed musicians wind up  using drugs 
like beta-blockers that block the action of the sympathetic nervous system  in order to slobber just in time for th e big arpeggi o.
your life with or without a couple of pounds of excess baggage in your bowels. Empty them.
The biology of this is quite well understood. The sympathetic nervous system is responsible. At the same time that it 
is sending a signal to your stomach to stop its contractions and to your small intestine to stop peristalsis, your 
sympathetic nervous system is actually stimulating muscular m ovement in your large intestine. Inject into a rat's brain 
the chemicals that turn on the sympat hetic nervous system, and suddenly the small intestine stops contracting and the 
large intestine starts contracting like crazy.
But why, to add insult to injury, is it so frequently diarrhea when you are truly frightened? Relatively large amounts of 
water are needed for digestion, to keep your food in solution as you break it down so that it will be easy to absorb into 
the circulation when digestion is done. As noted, a job of the large intestine is to get that water back, and that's why 
your bowels have to be so long—the leftovers slowly inch their way through the large intestine, starting as a soupy 
gruel and ending up, ideally, as reasonably dry stool. Disaster  strikes, run for your life, increase that large intestinal 
motility, and everything gets pushed through too fast for the water to be absorbed optimally. Diarrhea, simple as that.
STRESS AND FUNCTIONAL
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Broadly, there are two types of gastrointestinal disorders. In  the first, you feel terrible, something isn't working right, 
and the doctors find something wrong. These are "organic" GI disorders. A gaping hole in the wall of your stomach, 
in other words, a peptic ulcer, counts as  there being something demonstrably wron g. We'll consider ulcers shortly. Out
-of-control inflammation of tissue throughout your GI tract, which is what inflammatory bow el disease is, also counts 
as demonstrably wrong. This disorder will be briefly touched on in chapter 8.
But suppose you feel terrible, something isn't working right, and the docs can't find a thing wrong. Congratulations, 
you now have a "functional" GI disorder. These are immensely sensitive to stress. And this is not just the touchy-feely 
psychologists saying this. Papers about stress and functional GI disorders are even published in tough-guy meat-and-
potato scientific journals with names like Gut.Page 43 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe most common functional GI disorder , which will be considered here, is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which 
involves abdominal pain
(particularly just after a meal) that is relieved by defecating and sympto ms such as diarrhea or constipation, passage of 
mucus, bloating, and abdominal distention. Despite physicians checking you from every which end, they can't find 
anything wrong, which qualifies IBS as a functional disord er. IBS is among the most common of stress-sensitive 
disorders. Personally, all the major rites of  passage in my life have been marked by pretty impressive  cases of the runs 
a few days before—my bar mitzvah, going away to college, my doctoral defense, proposing marriage, my wedding. 
(Finally, here's that confessional to ne obligatory to successful  books these days. Now if I can only name some 
Hollywood starlet with whom I've taken diuretics, this may become a bestseller.)
Carefully conducted studies show that major chronic stre ssors increase the risk of the first symptoms of IBS 
appearing, and worsen  preexisting cases. This makes sense. As we saw,  what stress does is in crease the contractions 
in the colon, getting rid of that dead weight. And IBS—al so known as "spastic colon"—involves the colon being too 
contractile, an excellent way of producing diarrhea. (It is not clear why lots of st ress-induced contractions of the colon 
can lead to constipation. As a possible explanation, the stress-indu ced contractions in the co lon are directional, which 
is to say, they push the contents of the colon from the small intestinal end to the anus. And if they do that a lot, things 
get accelerated, resulting in diar rhea. However, in one plausi ble scenario, with long en ough periods of stress, the 
contractions begin to get disorganized, lo se their directionality, so that not mu ch of anything moves toward the anus).
So people with IBS are disproportionately likely to be expe riencing a lot of stressors. But in addition, IBS can be a 
disorder of too much gastrointestinal sensitivity to stress. This can be shown in experimental situations, where a 
person with IBS is subjected to a controlled stressor (keepin g her hand in ice water for a while, trying to make sense 
of two recorded conversations at once, participating in a pressured interv iew). Contractions in the colon increase in 
response to these stressors more in IBS patients than in control subjects.
Another connection between stress and IBS concerns pain. As we'l l see in chapter 9, stress can blunt the sort of pain 
you feel in your skin and skeletal muscles while increasing the sensitivity of internal organs like the intestines to pain 
(something called "visceral" pain). And th at is the profile seen in IBS patients—less sensitivity to skin ("cutaneous") 
pain, and more visceral pain. Even more support for the stress/IBS link is that people with IBS don't typically have 
hypercon-tractility of their bowels when they are asleep. Gut spasticity is not
something that's going on all the time—only when the person is awake, amid the opportunities to be stressed.
What's the physiology of this gut that  is too contractile? As we saw earlier,  the sympathetic nervous system is 
responsible for the increased large intestinal contractions during stress. And as would be expected, people with IBS 
have overactive sympathetic nervous systems (though it is less clear whether glucocorticoid levels are abnormal in 
IBS). And just to make the whole process worse, the pain of that gassy, distended, hypersensitive gut can stimulate 
sympathetic activation even furthe r, making for a vicious circle.
So ongoing stress can be closely associated  with IBS. Interestingly, traumatic stre ss early in life (a buse, for example) 
greatly increases the risk of IBS in adulthood. This implie s that childhood trauma can leav e an echo of vu lnerability, a 
large intestine that is hyperreactive to stress, long afterward. Animal st udies have shown that this occurs.
Despite these findings, there is a great deal of resistance to the link between stress and IBS (prompting some semi-
irate letters to me from read ers of earlier editions of this book). One reason for this is the linkage between IBS and 
certain personality types. In the cases of  depression or anxiety, th e connection is solid, but ear lier linkages seem pretty 
suspect. These studies tended to focus on a lot of psychoanalytic gibberish (there, now I'll get myself into trouble with 
that crowd)—some hoo-ha about the person being stuck in the anal stage of development, a regression to the period of 
toilet training where going to the bath room gained great acclaim and, sudden ly, diarrhea was a symbolic reach for 
parental approval. Or the approval of the doctor as a parental surrogate. Or something or other. I'm not sure how they 
factored in constipation, but I'm sure they did.
Few gastroenterologists take these ideas seriously anymore. However, in less scientific circles, some still cling to 
these views. It is easy to see how some one suffering from IBS, who has just managed to clear up the perception that 
they're still having some potty-training issues, isn't enthus ed about getting fingered for not dealing well with stress.
Another reason why the stress /IBS connection is often vi ewed with suspicio n is because there have been many 
studies that have failed to find a link. Why should this be?
First, both the severity of IBS symptoms and the intensity of stressors that someone is experiencing tend to wax and 
wane over time, and detecting a link between two such fl uctuating patterns takes some very fancy statistics. 
(Typically, a technique called time-series analysis, a subject four classes more advan ced than the statistics that most 
biomedical scientists have sort of learned. When my wife had to do aPage 44 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmtime-series analysis as part of her doctor al research, it made me nervous just to  have a textbook on the subject in the 
house.) Such waxing and waning of stress and of symptoms is particularly difficul t to track because most studies are 
retrospective (they look at people who already have IBS and ask them to identify stressors in their past) rather than 
prospective (in which people who do not have a disease are followed to see if stress predicts who is going to get it). 
The problem here is that people are te rribly inaccurate at recalli ng information about stresso rs and symptoms that are 
more than a few months old, a point we're going to return to often in this book. Moreover, as was mentioned above, 
the sorts of stressors that can increas e the risk of IBS can occur many year s prior to the emergence of symptoms, 
making the link hard to detect even in prospective studies. Finally, "IBS" is probably a hodgepodge of diseases with 
multiple causes, and stress may be relevant to only some of them, and it takes some additional fancy statistics to 
detect those folks as a meaningful subset of the wh ole, instead of as just random noise in the data.
At later junctures in this book, we will see other supposed links between stress and some di sease, and be in the same 
quandary—there definitely is a link in some patients, or clinical impressions strongly support a stress-disease link, yet 
hard-nosed studies fail to show the same thing. As we w ill see repeatedly, the trouble is that the supposedly hard-
nosed studies are often asking a fairly unsophisticated, straightforward question:  does stress cause the disease in the 
majority of sufferers? The far more sophisticated questions to ask are whet her stress worsens preexisting disease, 
whether patterns of symptoms and of stressors fluctuate in pa rallel over time, and whether these links occur only in a 
subset of vulnerable indivi duals. When asked in those ways, the st ress-disease link becomes far more solid.
ulcers
At last we arrive at the medical proble m that started the stress concept on the road to fame and fortune. An ulcer is a 
hole in the wall of an organ, and ulcers originating in the stomach or in the organs  immediately bordering it are 
termed peptic ulcers. The ones within the stomach are called gastric ulcers; those a bit higher up than the stomach are 
esophageal, and those at the border of the stomach and the intestine are duodenal (the most common of peptic ulcers).
Photomicrograph of a stomach ulcer.
As will be recalled, peptic ulcers were among the trio of  symptoms Selye noted more th an sixty years ago when he 
exposed his rats to nonspecific unpleas antness. Since then, stomach ulcers ha ve emerged as the disorder most 
recognized by the lay public as a stress-related disease: in this view, you have upsetting thoughts for a long period of 
time and holes appear in the walls of your stomach.
Most clinicians agree that there is a s ubtype of ulcers that forms relatively rapidly (sometimes over the course of days) 
in humans who are exposed to immensel y stressful crises—hemorrhag e, massive infection, trauma due to accident or 
surgery, burns over large parts of the body, and so on. Such "stress ulcers" can  be life threatening in severe cases.
But where a lot of contention has appear ed has been with the issue of gradually  emerging ulcers. This used to be a 
realm where people, including physicians, would immediately think stress. But a revolution has dramatically changed 
thinking about ulcers.Page 45 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThat revolution came with the discov ery in 1983 of a bacterium called Helicobacter pylori. This obscure 
microorganism was discovered by an obscure Australian pathologist named Robert Warren. He, in
turn, interested an even mo re obscure younger colleague named Barry Marshall, who documented that this bacterium 
consistently turned up in biopsies of the stomachs of people with duodenal ulcers and stomach inflammation 
(gastritis). He theorized that it actually caused the inflammation and ulcers,  announced this to the 
(gastroenterological) world at a conference, and was nearly laughed out of  the room. Ulcers were caused by diet, 
genetics, stress—not bacteria. Everyone kn ew that. And besides, because the stomach  is so incredibly acidic, owing to 
the hydrochloric acid in stomach juices , no bacteria could survive in there.  People had known for years that the 
stomach was a sterile environment, and th at any bacteria that migh t turn up were just due to contamination by some 
sloppy pathologist.
Marshall showed that the bacteria cau sed gastritis and ulcers in mice. That's  great, but mice work  differently than 
humans, everyone said. So, in a heroic, soon-to-be-a-movie gesture, he swallowed some Helicobacter bilge and 
caused gastritis in himself. Still, they ignored Marshall. Even tually, some folks in the field got tired of hearing him go 
on about the damn bacteria at meetings , decided to do some experiments to prove him wrong, and found that he was 
absolutely right.
Helicobacter pylori turns out to be able to live in the acidic stomach environment, protecting itself by having a 
structure that is particular ly acid-resistant and by wrapping itself in a coat of protective bicarbonate. And this 
bacterium probably has a lot to do with 85 to 100 percen t of ulcers in Western populations (as well as with stomach 
cancer). Nearly 100 percent of people in the developing  world are infected with Helicobacter —it is probably the most 
common chronic bacterial infection in humans. The bacteria in fect cells in the lining of the stomach, causing gastritis, 
which somehow compromises the ability of those cells lin ing the duodenum to defend themselves against stomach 
acids. Boom, under the right conditions, you've got a hole in that duodenal wall.
Many of the details remain to be sorted out, but th e greatest triumph for Marshall and Warren has been the 
demonstration that antimi crobial drugs, such as antibiotics, turn out to  be the greatest things since sliced bread for 
dealing with duodenal ulcers—th ey are as good at getting rid of the ulcers as  are antacids or antihistamine drugs (the 
main prior treatments) and, best of all, unlike the aftermath of other treatments, ulcers now stay away (or at least until 
the next Helicobacter infection).
Once everybody in the field got used to the idea of Marshall and Warren being carried around on sedan chairs for their 
discovery, they embraced Helicobacter with a vengeance. It makes perfect sense, given
the contemporary desire of medicine to move toward hard- nosed, reductive models of dis ease, rather than that wimpy 
psychosomatic stuff. The Center for Di sease Control sent out edu cational pamphlets to ever y physician in America, 
advising them to try to disabuse their patients of the obsolete notion that stress has anything to do with peptic ulcers. 
Clinicians celebrated at never having again to sit down with their ulcer patients, make some serious eye contact, and 
ask them how their lives were going. In what one pair of investigators has termed the "Helicobacterization" of stress 
research on ulcers, the number of papers on stress as a component of the ulcer story has plummeted. Don't bother with 
this psychological stuff when we finally have gotten some r eal science here, complete with  a bacterium that's got its 
own Latin name.
The trouble is that one bacterium can't be  the whole story. For starters, up to 15 percent of duodenal ulcers form in 
people who aren't infected with Helicobacter, or with any other known bacterium related to it. More damning, only 
about 10 percent of the people  infected with the bacteria get ulcers. It's got to be Helicobacter pylori plus something 
else. Sometimes, the something else is a lifestyle risk factor—alcohol, smoking, skipping breakfast habitually, taking 
a lot of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin. Maybe the something else is a genetic tendency to secrete a 
lot of acid or to make only minimal amounts of mucus to protect stomach linings from the acid.
But one of the additional factors is stress. Study after st udy, even those carried out after the ascendancy of the 
bacteria, show that duodenal ulceration is more likely to occur in people who are anxious, depressed, or undergoing 
severe life stressors (imprisonment, war,  natural disasters). An analysis of the entire literature shows that somewhere 
between 30 and 65 percent of peptic ulcers have psychosocial factors (i.e., stress) involved. The problem is that stress 
causes people to drink and smoke more. So maybe stress in creases the risk of an ulcer  merely by increasing the 
incidence of those lifestyle risk factors. But no—after you c ontrol for those variables, stress itself still causes a two- to 
threefold increase in th e risk of an ulcer.
Helicobacter is relevant to ulcers, but it is only in the context of its interactions with these other factors, including 
stress. You can show this statistically if you study a zillio n ulcer patients. Then, do a fanc y mathematical analysis that 
takes into account bacterial load, lifestyle risk factors, and st ress (something aptly called a multivariate analysis). 
You'll observe that ulcers can ar ise if you only have a little bit of one of th e factors (bacterial load , stress, or lifestyle 
risks), so long as you have a lot of one or two of the others. As an example of that, if you exposePage 46 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmlab rats to psychological stressors, they get ulcers—but not if they live in a germ -free environment that lacks 
Helicobacter.
So how does stress exacerbate the process of ulcer formatio n? Some sixty years after Se lye first noticed his rats' 
ulcers, it is still not qui te clear. There are some fa vorite scenarios, however.
Acid Rebound To understand this mechanism, we ha ve to grapple with the grim realit y of what bizarre things we are 
willing to eat and expect our stomachs to digest. The only way that the stomach is going to be able to handle some of 
this stuff is if it has powerful degradative weapons. The contractions certainly help, but the main weapon is the 
hydrochloric acid that pours into your stomach from the cells lining it. Hydrochloric acid is immensely acidic; all well 
and good, but it raises the obvious question of why your stomach is not itself digested by the digestive acids. Eat 
somebody else's stomach and your stomach disintegrates it. How do your own stomach walls remain unscathed? 
Basically, your stomach has to spend a fortune protecting itself . It builds many layers of stomach wall and coats them 
with thick, soothing mucus that buffers the acid. In addition,  bicarbonate is secreted into  the stomach to neutralize the 
acid. This is a wonderful solution, and you happily go about digestion.
Along comes a stressful period that lasts months. Your body cuts down on its acid secretion—there are now frequent 
times when digestion is being inhibited. During this period, your stomach essentially decides to save itself some 
energy by cutting corners. It cuts back  a bit on the constant thickening of the stomach walls, undersecretes mucus and 
bicarbonate, and pockets the difference. Why not? There isn't much acid around during this stressful period anyway.
End of stressful period; you decide to celebrate by eating a large chocolate cak e inscribed for the occasion, stimulate 
your parasympathetic nervous system, st art secreting hydrochloric acid, and ... your defenses are down. The walls 
have thinned, there isn't as thick a protective mucous laye r as there used to be, the bicarbonate is overwhelmed. A 
couple of repeated cycles of stress an d rebound with a bacterial infection that  is already compromising the defenses 
and you've got an ulcer.
Suppose you are in the middle of a very stressful period, an d you worry that you are at ri sk for an ulcer. What's the 
solution? You could make sure that you remain under stress every second for the rest of your life. You definitely will 
avoid ulcers caused by hydrochloric acid secretion, but of course you'll die for a zillion other reasons. The
paradox is that, in this scenario, ulce rs are not formed so much  during the stressor as durin g the recovery. This idea 
predicts that several periods of transient stress should be more ulcerative than one long, continuous period, and animal 
experiments have generally shown this to be the case.
Decreased Blood Flow As we know, in an emergency, you want to deliver as much blood as possible to the muscles 
that are exercising. In response to stress, your sympathetic nervous system diverts blood from the gut to more 
important places—remember the man with a gunshot wound in the stomach, whose guts would blanch from decreased 
blood flow every time he became angry or  anxious. If your stressor is one that involves a dramatic decrease in blood 
flow to the gut (for example, following a hemorrhage), it begins to cause little infarcts—small strokes—in your 
stomach walls, because of lack of oxyge n. You develop small lesions of necro tic (dead) tissue, which are the building 
blocks of ulcers.
This condition probably aris es for at least two reasons. First, with d ecreased blood flow, le ss of the acid that 
accumulates is being flushed away. Th e second reason involves another paradoxical piece of biology. We all 
obviously need oxygen and would turn an unsightly blue without it. However, running your cells on oxygen can 
sometimes produce an odd, dangerous class of compounds called oxygen radicals. Normally, another group of 
compounds (free radical quenchers, or scavengers) dispose of  these villains. There is so me evidence, however, that 
during periods of chronic stress, when blood flow (and thus oxygen delivery) to the gut decreases, your stomach stops 
making the scavengers that protect you from the oxygen radicals. Fine for the period of stress (since the oxygen 
radicals are also in shorter supp ly); it's a clever way to save  energy during a crisis. At the end of stress, however, when 
blood flow chock-full of oxygen resumes and the normal amount of oxygen radicals is generated, the stomach has its 
oxidative pants down. Without sufficient scavengers, the oxygen radicals start killing cells in the stomach walls; 
couple that with cells already in trouble thanks to bacteria l infection and you've got an ulcer. Note how similar this 
scenario is to the acid-rebound  mechanism: in both cases, the damage occurs not during the period of stress but in its 
aftermath, and not so much b ecause stress increases the size of an insult (f or example, the amount  of acid secreted or 
the amount of oxygen radicals produced), but because, during the stressful emergency, the gut scrimps on defenses 
against such insults.
Immune Suppression Helicobacter as a bacterium triggers your immune system into trying to defend against it.* As 
you will soon learn in sickening detail (chapter 8), chronic stress suppresses immunity, and in this scenario, lowered 
immune defenses equals more Helicobacters reproducing happily.
Insufficient Amounts of Prostaglandins In this scenario, micro-ulcers begin now and then in your gut, as part of the 
expected wear and tear on the system . Normally your body can repair the dama ge by secreting a class of chemicals Page 47 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmcalled prostaglandins, thought to aid the healing process by increasing blood flow through the stomach walls. During 
stress, however, the synthesis of these prostaglandins is inhi bited by the actions of glucoc orticoids. In this scenario, 
stress does not so much cause ulcers to fo rm as impair your body's ability to catch  them early and repair them. It is not 
yet established how often this is the route for ulcer formation during stress. (Aspirin also inhibits prostaglandin 
synthesis, which is why aspiri n can aggravate a bleeding ulcer.)
Stomach Contractions For unknown reasons, stress causes the stomach to initiate slow, rhythmic contractions (about 
one per minute); and for unknown reasons, these seem to add to ulcer risk. One idea is th at during the contractions, 
blood flow to the stomach is disrupted, causing little burs ts of ischemia; there's not mu ch evidence for this, however. 
Another idea is that the contractions m echanically damage the stomach walls. The jury is still out on that mechanism.
Most of these mechanisms are pretty  well documented routes by which ulcers can form; of those credible 
mechanisms, most can occur during at  least certain types of stressors. More than one mechanism may occur 
simultaneously, and people s eemingly differ as to how lik ely each mechanism is to occu r in their gut during stress, 
and how likely it is to interact with bacterial infection. Ad ditional mechanisms for stress's  role in ulcer formation will 
no doubt be discovered, but for the moment these should be quite sufficient to make anyone sick.
Peptic ulcers are what the physician Susan Levenstein, the wittiest person on earth writing about gastroenterology, has 
termed "the very model of a modern etiology."+ Stress doesn't cause peptic ulcers to
* And some scientists even think that Helicobacter, amid its disease-causing potential, is also be neficial insofar as it stimulates immunity.
+ Admittedly, there's a small sample size of such writers. In one of my favorite essays of hers, she begins, "When I was in medi cal school, the 
reigning approach to the patie nt combined the patern al, the veterinary, and the priestly : interrogate, palpate, pontificate."
form. But it makes the biological villains that do cause ulcers to form more likely to occur, or more virulent, or 
impairs your ability to defend yourself against those vill ains. This is the classic in teraction between the organic 
(bacteria, viruses, toxins, mutations) and the psychogenic components of disease.
6
DWARFISM AND THE IMPORTANCE OF MOTHERS
It still surprises me that organisms grow. Maybe 1 don't
believe in biology as much as I claim. Eating and digest-
ing a meal seems very real. You put a massive amount of
something or other in your mouth, and, as a result, all
sorts of tangible things happen—your jaw gets tired, your
stomach distends, eventually so mething comes out the other end.
Growth seems pretty tangible, too. Long bones get longer, kids weigh
more when you heft them.
My difficulty is with the steps that connect digestion with growth. I know how it works; my university even allows me 
to teach impressionable studen ts about it. But it just seem s implausible. Someone ate a mo untain of spaghetti, salad, 
garlic bread, and two slices of cake for dessert—and that has been transformed and is now partially inside this test 
tube of blood? And somehow it's going to  be reconstructed into bone? Just thin k, your femur is made up of tiny pieces 
of your mother's chicken potpie that you ate throughout yo ur youth. Ha! You see, you don't really believe in the 
process either. Maybe we're too primitive to comprehend the transmogrification of material.
HOW WE GROW
Nevertheless, growth does occur as a resu lt of eating. And in a kid, it's not a trivial process. The brain gets bigger, the 
shape of the head changes. Cells divide, grow in size, and synthesize new proteins. Long bones lengthen as 
cartilaginous cells at the ends of bones migrate intoPage 48 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthe shaft and solidify into bone. Baby fat melts away and is replaced by muscle. The larynx thickens and the voice 
deepens, hair grows in all sort s of unlikely places on the body br easts develop, testes enlarge.
From the standpoint of understanding the effects of stress on growth, the most important feature of the growth process 
is that, of course, growth doesn't come  cheap. Calcium must be obtained to bu ild bones, amino acids are needed for all 
that protein synthesis, fatty acids build cell walls—and it's glucose that pays for the building costs. Appetite soars, and 
nutrients pour in from the intestines. A large part of what various hormones do is to mobilize the energy and the 
material needed for all these civic ex pansion projects. Growth hormone dominates the process. Sometimes it works 
directly on cells in the body—for example, growth hormone helps to break down fat stores, flushing them into the 
circulation so they can be diverted to  the growing cells. Alternatively, sometimes growth hormone must first trigger 
the release of another class of hormones called somatomedins, which actually do the job,  such as promoting cell 
division. Thyroid hormone plays a role, promoting growth hormone release, making bones more responsive to 
somatomedins. Insulin does something similar as well. Th e reproductive hormones come into play around puberty. 
Estrogen promotes the growth of long bones, both by acting directly on bone and by increasing growth hormone 
secretion. Testosterone does similar things to long bones and, in addition, enhances muscle growth.
Adolescents stop growing when the ends of the long bones meet and begin to fuse, but for complex reasons, 
testosterone, by accelerating th e growth of the ends of lo ng bones, can actually speed th e cessation of growth. Thus, 
pubescent boys given testosterone will, paradoxically, wind up having their adult stature blunted a bit. Conversely, 
boys castrated before puberty grow to be quite tall, with lanky bodies and particularly long limbs. Opera history buffs 
will recognize this morphology , as castrati were fame d for this body shape.
NEUROTIC PARENTS: BEWARE!
It is time to look at how stress disrupts normal developm ent. As we'll see, this not only involves impairing skeletal 
growth (that is, how tall you grow to be), but also how stress early in life can alter yo ur vulnerabilit y to disease 
throughout your lifetime.
Now, before I launch into this, I have to issue a warning to anyone who is a parent, or who plans to be a parent, or 
who had parents.
There's nothing like parenthood to make you really neurotic, as you worry about the consequences of your every act, 
thought, or omission. I have young children, and here are some of the heinous things that my wife and I have done to 
irreparably harm them: there wa s the time we were desperate to placate them  about something and allowed them to eat 
some sugar-bomb breakfast cereal we'd normally ban; then there was the loud concert we went to when our firstborn 
was a third-trimester fetus, causing him to kick throughout, no doubt in pained protest; and there was the time we 
messed up with our otherwise ceasele ss vigilance and allowed ten seconds of  a violent cartoon to show on the 
television while we fumbled with the Kumbaya-esque video we were attempting to insert. You only want perfection 
for the ones you love beyond words, so you get nu tsy at times. This section will make you nutsier.
So keep this warning in mind, a point I will return to at the end.
PRENATAL STRESS
What is childhood about? It is a time when you make assessm ents about the nature of the world. For example, "If you 
let go of something, it falls down, not up." Or, "If somethin g is hidden underneath something else, it still exists." Or, 
ideally, "Even if Mommy disappears for a while, she w ill come back because Mo mmy always comes back."
Often, these assessments shape your view of the world forever. For example, as w ill be discussed in chapter 14, if you 
lose a parent to death while you are a child, your risk of major depression has increased for the rest of your life. I will 
suggest that this arises from having learned at a premature age a deep emotional lesson about the nature of life, 
namely, that this is a world in which awful things can happen over which you have no control.
It turns out that during development, beginning with fetal life, your body is also learning about the nature of the world 
and, metaphorically, making lifelong decisions about how to respond to the outside world. And if development 
involves certain types of stresso rs, some of these "decisions" cause a lifelong  increase in the risk of certain diseases.
Consider a female who is pregnant during a famine. She's not getting enough calories, nor is her fetus. It turns out that 
during the latter part of pregnancy, a fetus is "learning" about how plentiful food is in that outside world, and a famine 
winds up "teaching" it that, jeez,
there's not a whole lot of food out ther e, better store every smidgen of it. Something about the metabolism of that fetus 
shifts permanently, a feature called meta bolic "imprinting" or "programming."  Forever after, that fetus will be Page 49 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmparticularly good at storing the food it consumes, at retaini ng every grain of precious salt from the diet. Forever after, 
that fetus develops what has been termed a "thrifty" metabolism.
And what are the consequences  of that? Suddenly we find ourselves back  in the middle of chapters 3 and 4. 
Everything else being equal throughout life, even late in life , that organism is more at risk for hypertension, obesity, 
adult-onset diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.
Remarkably, things work precisely this way in rats, pigs, and sheep. And humans as well. The most dramatic and 
most cited example concerns the Dutch Hunger Winter at the en d of World War II. The occupying Nazis were being 
pushed back on all fronts, the Dutch were trying to aid th e Allies coming to liberate them, and, as punishment, the 
Nazis cut off all food transport.  For a demarcated seas on, the Dutch starved. People consumed less than 1,000 calories 
a day, were reduced to eating tulip bulbs, and 16,000 people  starved to death. Fetuses, going about their lifelong 
metabolic programming, learned some severe lessons about food availability during that winter of starvation. The 
result is a cohort of people with thrifty metabolisms and incr eased risks of Metabolic synd rome a half-century later. 
Seemingly, different aspects of metabolism and physiology ge t programmed at different points of fetal development. 
If you were a first-trimester fetus during the famine, that pr ograms you for a greater risk of heart disease, obesity, and 
an unhealthy cholesterol prof ile, whereas if you were a second- or third- trimester fetus, that programs you for a 
greater diabetes risk.
The key to this phenomenon seems to be not only that you we re undernourished as a fetus, but that after birth you had 
plenty of food and were able to recover from the deprivation quickly. Thus, from early in childhood, you not only 
were highly efficient at storing nutrients, bu t had access to plentiful nutrients.*
So avoid starving a fetus while you're pregnant. But this ph enomenon also applies to less dramatic situations. Within 
the normal range of birth weights, the lower the weight of a baby (when adjusted for body length), the greater the risk 
of those Metabolic syndrome
* The Dutch example was ideal for this, in that once the country recovered from that winter, people had the benefit of plentifu l food. In contrast, the 
same has not been seen among people who we re fetuses during the Siege of Leningrad in  World War II—food was not plentiful after ward.
problems in adulthood. Even after you control for adult body weight, low birth weight still predicts an increased risk 
of diabetes and hypertension.
These are big effects. When you compare those who were heaviest versus lighte st at birth, you see an approximate 
eight-fold difference in the risk of pre-diabetes, and ab out an eighteen-fold differen ce in the risk of Metabolic 
syndrome. Among both men and women, compare those whose birth weights were  in the lowest 25 percent versus 
those in the highest 25 percent, and the former have a 50 percent higher  rate of death from heart disease.
This relationship between fetal nutritional events and lifelo ng risks of metabolic and cardiovascular disease was first 
described by the epidemiologist David Barker of Southampton Hospital in England, and now goes by the name Fetal 
Origins of Adult Disease (FOAD). And we're not done with this yet.
Starvation is clearly a stressor, raisi ng the question of whether the metabolic  programming occurs because of the 
nutritional consequences of the shortage of calories, and/or because of the stre ssfulness of the shortage of calories. 
Asked another way, do non-nutritional stressors during pregnancy also induce FOAD-like effects? The answer is, yes.
An extensive literature, stretc hing back decades, shows that stressing a female  rat in any number of  ways while she is 
pregnant will cause lifelong changes in the physiology of her offspring. Predictably, one set of changes involves 
glucocorticoid secretion. On ce again, think of the fetal body "learning" a bout the outside world, this time along the 
lines of, "How stressful is it out th ere?" Fetuses can monitor signals of stress from the mother, insofar as 
glucocorticoids readil y pass through to the fetal circul ation, and lots of glucocortico ids "teach" the fetus that it is 
indeed a stressful world out there. The result? Be prepared for that stressful world: tend toward secreting excessive 
amounts of glucocorticoids. Prenatally stressed rats grow into adults with elevated glucocorticoid levels—depending 
on the study, elevated basal levels, a larg er stress-response, and /or a sluggish recovery from the st ress-response. The 
lifelong programmi ng seems to be due to a permanent decrease in th e number of receptors for glucocorticoids in one 
part of the brain. The brain region is involved in turni ng off this stress-response by inhibiting CRH release. Fewer 
glucocorticoid receptors there mean less sensitivity to the hormone's signal, which mean s less effective reining in of 
subsequent glucocorticoid secretion. The result is a lifelong tendency toward elevated levels.
Is it the glucocorticoid secretion by the stressed pregnant female that gives rise to th ese permanent changes in the 
offspring? Seemingly yes—th e effect can be replicated  in a number of species, including nonhuman primates, by 
injecting the pregnant female with high glucocorticoid levels, instead of stressing her.
A smaller but fairly solid literature shows that prenatal stress programs humans for higher glucocorticoid secretion in 
adulthood as well. In these studies, low birth weight (corrected for body length) is used as a surrogate marker for Page 50 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmstressors during fetal life, and the lower the birth weight, the higher the basal glucocorticoid levels in adults ranging 
from age twenty to seventy; this rela tionship becomes even more  pronounced when low birth weight is coupled with 
premature birth.*
The excessive glucocorticoid ex posure of a stressful fetal life seems to contri bute to the lifelong increase in the risk of 
Metabolic syndrome as well. As evidence, if you expose a fetal rat, sheep, or nonhuman primate to lots of synthetic 
glucocorticoids during late gestational life (by injecting the moth er with them), that fetus wi ll be more at risk for the 
symptoms of Metabolic syndrome as an adult. How does this  arise? A plausible sequence is  that the prenatal exposure 
to high glucocorticoid levels leads to the elevated glucocorticoid levels in adulthood, which increases the risk of 
Metabolic syndrome. Those readers who have memorized the book so far will ha ve no trouble recalling exactly how 
an excess of glucocorticoids in adul thood can increase the odds of obesit y, insulin-resistant diabetes, and 
hypertension. Despite those potential links, the elevated glucocorticoid levels in adulthood are probably only one of 
the routes linking prenatal stress with the adult Metabolic syndrome.
So now we have hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular dis ease, obesity, and glucocorticoi d excess in this picture. 
Let's make it worse. How about the reproductive system? An  extensive literature shows th at if you stress pregnant 
rats, you "demasculinize" the male fetuses. They are less se xually active as adults, and have less developed genitals. 
As we will see in the next chapter, st ress decreases testosterone secretion, a nd it seems to do so in male fetuses as 
well. Furthermore, glucocorticoids and testosterone have similar chemical structures
* The seventy-year-olds were studied in Finl and. As we will see at a couple of points  in the book, studies like this one could only be carried out in 
Scandinavia, whose countries have a traditio n of obsessively good record  keeping about everything im aginable, including birth w eights for large 
populations of people.
(they are both "steroid" hormones), and a lot of glucocorticoids in a fetus can be gin to gum up and block receptors for 
testosterone, making it impossible for the testosterone to have its effects.
More FOADish problems. Seriously stress a pregnant rat and her offspring will grow up to be anxious. Now, how do 
you tell if a rat is anxious? You put it in a new (and thus, by definition, scary) environmen t; how long does it take for 
it to explore? Or take advantage of the fact that rats, being nocturnal, don't like bright lights. Take a hungry rat and put 
some food in the middle of a brightly lit cage; how long un til the rat goes for the food? How readily can the rat learn 
in a novel setting, or socially interact with new rats? Ho w much does the rat defecate in a novel setting?* Prenatally 
stressed rats, as adults, freeze up when aro und bright lights, can't l earn in novel settings, def ecate like crazy. Sad. As 
we will see in chapter 15, anxiety revolves around a part of the brain called the amygd ala, and prenatal stress 
programs the amygdala into a lifelong profile that has anxi ety written all over it. The amygdala winds up with more 
receptors for (that is, more sensitivity to) glucocorticoids, mo re of a neurotransmitter that  mediates anxiety, and fewer 
receptors for a brain chemic al that reduces anxiety.+ Does prenatal stress in humans  make for anxious adults? It's 
difficult to study this in humans, in that it is hard to find mothers who are anxious during pregnancy, or anxious while 
their child is growing up, but not both. So there's not a huge amount of evidence for this happening in humans.
Finally, chapter 10 will review how an excess of stress can  have bad effects on the brain, particularly in the 
developing brain. Prenatally stressed rodents grow up to have fewer connections between the neurons in a key area of 
the brain involved in learning and memory, and have more  impairments of memory in old age, while prenatally 
stressed nonhuman primates have memory problems and form fewer
* I kid you not, and this should make perfect sense after chapte r 5. Anxious in a new environmen t? Increase large intestinal mo tility, defecate, and 
the grad student doing a thesis on rat anxi ety counts the number of fecal pellets in the cage afterward for a remarkably inform ative measure of 
anxiety.
+ Just to give away some of the informa tion coming in chapter 15 , the neurotransmitter that mediat es anxiety via the amygdala is  none other than 
CRH (recall from chapter 5 that CRH mediates other aspects of th e stress-response than merely releasing ACTH). Meanwhile, the r eceptor for the 
brain chemical that inhibits anxiety is called a benzodiazepine re ceptor. What is a benzodiazepin e? No one is exactly sure what  the anxiety-
reducing benzodiazepine is in the brain that normally binds to the receptor, but we all know about the synthetic benzodiazepine s—these are Valium 
and Librium, the anxiety-reducing tranquilizers.
neurons as well. The human studies have been very hard to  carry out for reasons similar to that of those examining 
whether prenatal stress increases the risk  of anxiety. With that caveat, a number of studies have shown that such stress 
results in children born with a smal ler head circumference (which certainly  fits in with the picture of being 
underweight in general). However, it's not clear whether head circumference at birth predicts how many academic 
degrees the kid is going to have after her name thirty years later.
One final piece of the FOAD story is so intrinsically fascinating th at it made me stop thinking like a worried parent 
for a few minutes and instead I just marveled at biology.
Suppose you have a fetus exposed to lots of stress, say,  malnutrition, and who thus programs a thrifty metabolism. 
Later, as an adult, she gets pregnant. She consumes normal  amounts of food. Because she has that thrifty metabolism, 
is so good at storing away nutrients in case that fetal fami ne ever comes back again, he r body grabs a disproportionate Page 51 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmshare of the nutrients in her bloodstream for herself. In ot her words, amid consuming an average amount of food, her 
fetus gets a less than average share of it, producing mild malnutrition. And thus programs a milder version of a thrifty 
metabolism. And when that fetus eventually becomes pregnant....
In other words, these FOADish tendencies can be transmitted across generations, without the benefit of genes. It's not 
due to shared genes, but to shared environment, namely, the intimately shared blood supply during gestation.
Amazing. This is precisely what is seen  in the Dutch Hunger Winter population, in that their grandchildren are born 
with lower than expected birth weights. This is seen in other realms as well. Pick some rats at random and feed them 
on a diet that will make them become obese at the time of pregnancy. As a result, their offspring, despite being fed a 
normal diet, have an increased risk of obesity. As will their grandkids. Si milarly, in humans, having insulin-resistant 
diabetes while pregnant increases the risk of the disorder in your offspring, after controlling for weight. Wait a 
second—going through a famine means less nutrients in the bloodstream, while having insulin-resistant diabetes 
means more. How can they produce the sa me thrifty metabolism in the fetus? Remember, you have elevated levels of 
glucose in the bloodstream  in the case of diabetes becaus e you can't store the stuff. R ecall a one-sentence factoid from 
chapter 4—when overstuffed fat cells begin to become insulin- resistant, they release hormone s that urge other fat cells 
and muscle to do the same. And those hormones
get into the fetal circulation. So you have Mom, who is in sulin-resistant because she has too much energy stored away 
releasing hormones that make the normal-weight fetus ba d at energy storage as well ... and the fetus winds up 
underweight and with a thrifty metabolic view of the world.
So expose a fetus to lots of glucocorticoids and you are increasing its risk for obesit y hypertension, cardiovascular 
disease, insulin-resistant diabetes, ma ybe reproductive impairments, maybe anxiety, and impaired brain development. 
And maybe even setting up that fetus's eventual offspring for the same. Aren't you sorry now that the two of you had 
that argument over whether to videotape the de livery? Now on to the next realm of worries.
postnatal strEss
The obvious question to begin this section is, does postnatal stress have lifelong adverse effects on development as 
well?
Of course it can. To begin, what's the most stressful thing that could happen to an infant rat? Being deprived of its 
mother (while still receiving adequate nutrition). Work done by Paul Plotsky at  Emory University shows that maternal 
deprivation causes similar consequences in  a rat as prenatal stress: increased le vels of glucocorticoids during stress 
and an impaired recovery at the end of stress. More anxiet y, and the same sorts of chan ges in the amygdala as were 
seen in pre-natally stressed adults. And impaired development of a part of the brain relevant to learning and memory 
Separate an infant rhesus monkey from its mother and it grows up to have elevated glucocorticoid levels as well.
How about something more subtle? What if your rat mom is around but is simply inattentive? Michael Meaney of 
McGill University has looked at the lifelong consequences for rats of having had a highly attentive or highly 
inattentive mother. What counts as attentiveness? Groomin g and licking. Infants whose mothers groomed and licked 
the least produced kids who were milder versions of rats who were maternally deprived as infants, with elevated 
glucocorticoid levels.*
* While this clearly emphasizes the importan ce of being a well-groomed child if you ar e a rat, it's not quite obvious what the human equivalent 
would be.Page 52 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhat are the consequences of  childhood stress for disease vulnerability during adulthood in humans? This has been 
studied only minimally, which is not surprising, given how difficult such studies are. A number of studies, mentioned 
earlier, show that loss of a parent to death during childhood increases the lifelong risk of depression. Another, 
discussed in chapter 5, shows that ear ly trauma increases the risk of irr itable bowel syndrome in adulthood, and 
similar animal studies show that early stre ss produces large intestines that contr act to abnormal extents in response to 
stress.
Though the subject is still poorly studied, childhood stress may produce the building blocks for the sort of adult 
diseases we've been consider ing. For example, when you examine children who had been  adopted more than a year 
before from Romanian orphanages, the longer the child spent in the orphanage, the higher the resting glucocorticoid 
levels.* Similarly, children who have been abused have elevated glucocortico id levels, and decreased size and activity 
in the most highly evolved part of the brain, the frontal cortex.
* For those not familiar with these hellholes , Romanian orphanages have become the st udy subjects of choice for understanding t he consequences 
of massive sensory, intellectual, and emot ional deprivation in infants and children.
skeletal growth and stress dwarfism
How about the effects of stress on how tall you grow (often re ferred to as skeletal growth )? Skeletal growth is great 
when you are a ten-year-old lying in bed at night with a full belly. However, it's the usual scenario of it not making a 
whole lot of sense when you're sprinting from a lion. If th ere is no time to derive any advantages from digesting your 
meal at that point, there certainly isn't time to get any benefit from growth.
To understand the process by which stress inhibits skeletal growth, it helps to begin with extreme cases. A child of, 
say, eight years is brought to a doctor because she has stop ped growing. There are none of the typical problems—the 
kid is getting enough food, there is no apparent disease, she has no intestinal parasites that compete for nutrients. No 
one can identify an organic cause of her problem; yet she doesn't grow. In ma ny such cases, there turns out to be 
something dreadfully stressful in her life—emotional neglect  or psychological abuse. In such circumstances, the 
syndrome is called stress dwarfism, or psychosocial or psychogenic dwarfism.*
A question now typically comes to mind among people who are below average height. If you are short, yet didn't have 
any obvious chronic diseases as a kid and can recall a dread ful period in your childhood, are you a victim of mild 
stress dwarfism? Suppose one of your  parents had a job necessitating freque nt moves, and every year or two 
throughout childhood you were uprooted, forced to leave your friends, moved off to a strange school. Is this the sort 
of situation associated with psychogeni c dwarfism? Definitely not. How about something more severe? What about an 
acrimonious divorce? St ress dwarfism? Unlikely.
The syndrome is extremely ra re. These are the kids who are incessantly harassed and psychologically terrorized by the 
crazy stepfather. These are the kids who, when the police a nd the social workers break do wn the door, are discovered 
to have been locked in a closet forPage 53 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* Some clinical nomenclature: "m aternal deprivation syndrome," "deprivation syndro me," and "nonorganic failure to thrive" usual ly refer to infants 
and invariably to the loss  of the mother. "Stress dwarfism,"  "psychogenic dwarfism," and "psychosocial dwarfism" usually refer to children aged 
three years or older. However, some papers do not follow this ag e dichotomy; during the nineteen th century, infants dying of fa ilure to thrive in 
orphanages were said to suffer from  "marasmus," Greek for "wasting away."
extended periods, fed a tray of food slipped under the door. These are the products of vast, grotesque 
psychopathology. And they appear in every endocrinology textbook, standing nude in front of a growth chart. Stunted 
little kids, years behind their expected height, years behind in  mental development, bruised,  with distorted, flinching 
postures, haunted, slack facial expressi ons, eyes masked by the obligatory rect angles that accompany all naked people 
in medical texts. And all with stories to take your breath away and make you wonder at the potential sickness of the 
human mind.
Invariably, on the same page in the text is a surprising second photo—the same child a few years later, after having 
been placed in a different environment (or, as one pe diatric endocrinologist term ed it, having undergone a 
"parentectomy"). No bruises, maybe a te ntative smile. And a lot taller. So long  as the stressor is removed before the 
child is far into puberty (when the ends of the long bones fu se together and growth ceases ), there is the potential for 
some degree of "catchup" growth (although shortness of stature and some degree of stunting of personality and 
intellect usually persist into adulthood).
Despite the clinical rarity of stress dwarfism, instances pop up throughout hi story. One possible case arose during the 
thirteenth century as the result  of an experiment by that noted endocrinolo gist, King Frederick II  of Sicily. It seems 
that his court was engrossed in philosophic disputation over the natural language of humans. In an attempt to resolve 
the question, Frederick (who was apparently betting on Hebrew, Greek, or Latin) came up with a surprisingly 
sophisticated idea for an experiment. He  commandeered a bunch of infants and ha d each one reared in a room of its 
own. Every day someone would bring the child food, fresh blanke ts, and clean clothes, all of the best quality. But they 
wouldn't stay and play with the infant, or hold it—too mu ch of a chance that the person  would speak in the child's 
presence. The infants would be reared without human language, and everyone would get to see what was actually the 
natural language of humans.
Of course, the kids did not spontaneously burst out of the door one day reciting poetry in Italian or singing opera. The 
kids didn't burst out of the door at all. None of them survived. The lesson is obvious to us now—optimal growth and 
development do not merely depend on being fed the right number of calories and being kept warm. Frederick 
"laboured in vain, for the children could not live without clappings of hands and gestures and gladness of countenance 
and blandishments," reported the contemporary historian Salimbene.
A child suffering from stress dwarfism: changes in appearance during hospitalization (left to right).
It seems quite plausible that these kids, all healthy and well fed, died of a nonorganic failure to thrive.*
Another study that winds up in half the textbooks makes the same point, if more subtly. The subjects of the 
"experiment" were children reared in two different orphanages in Germany after World War II. Both orphanages were 
run by the government; thus there were important controls in place— the kids in both had the same general diet, the 
same frequency of doctors' visits, and so on. The main id entifiable difference in thei r care was the two women who 
ran the orphanages. The scientists even checked them, and their description soun ds like a parable. In one orphanage 
was Fraulein Grun, the warm, nurturing mother figure who played with the ch ildren, comforted them, and spent all 
day singing and laughing. In the other was Fraulein Schwarz, a woman who was clearly in the wrong profession. She 
discharged her professional obligations, but minimized her co ntact with the children; she frequently criticized and 
berated them, typically among their assembled p eers. The growth rates at the two orphanagesPage 54 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* Ol' King Fred was quite the budding scien tist. Then there was the time he got interest ed in digestion. Frederick wondered whe ther digestion was 
faster when you rested after eating or if you exercised. He had two me n brought from his prison, fed identical and sumptuous di nners, and sent one 
off to nap afterward, while the other went for a strenuous hunt. That phase of the experiment completed, he had both men return ed to his court, 
disemboweled in front of him, and their innards examined. The sleeper had digested his food better.
Growth rates in the two German orphanage s. During the first 26 weeks of the study, growth rates in Orphanage A, 
under the administration of Fraulein Grun, were much greater than those in Orphanage B, with the stern Fraulein 
Schwarz. At 26 weeks (vertical line), Fraulein Grun left Orphanage A and was replaced by Fraulein Schwarz. The 
rate of growth in that orphanage promptly slowed; growth in Orphanage B, now minus the stern Fraulein Schwarz, 
accelerated and soon surpassed that of Orphanage A. A fascinating elaboration emerges from the fact that Schwarz 
was not completely heartless, but had a subset of children who were her favorites (Curve C), whom she had 
transferred with her.
were entirely different. Fraulein Schwarz's kids grew in height and wei ght at a slower pace than the kids in the other 
orphanage. Then, in an elabor ation that couldn't have been more useful if it had been planned by a scientist, Fraulein 
Grun moved on to greener pastures and, for some bureaucra tic reason, Fraulein Schwarz was transferred to the other 
orphanage. Growth rates in her former orphanage promptly increased; those in her new one decreased.
A final and truly disturbing example comes to mind. If y ou ever find yourself reading chapter after chapter about 
growth endocrinology (which I don't recommend), you  will note an occasional odd re ference to Peter Pan—perhaps a 
quotation from the play, or a snide comment about Tinker Bell. I'd long  noted the phenomenon and finally, in a 
chapter in one textbook, I found the explanation for it.
The chapter reviewed the regulation of gr owth in children and the capacity for severe psychological stress to trigger 
psychogenic dwarfism. It gave an exampl e that occurred in a Bri tish Victorian family. A son, age thirteen, the beloved 
favorite of the mother, is killed in an accident. The mother, despairing and bereaved, takes to her bed in grief for years 
afterward, utterly ignoring her other, si x-year-old son. Horr ible scenes ensue. For exampl e, the boy, on one occasion, 
enters her darkened room; the mo ther, in her delusional state, briefly believe s it is the dead son—"David, is that you? 
Could that be you?"—before realizing: "Oh, it is only you." Growing up, being "only you." On the rare instances 
when the mother interacts with the youn ger son, she repeatedly expresses the same obsessive thought: the only solace 
she feels is that David died when he was still perfect, still a boy, never to be ruined by growing up and growing away 
from his mother.
The younger boy, ignored (the stern, dist ant father seemed to have been irrele vant to the family dynamics), seizes 
upon this idea; by remaining a boy forever, by not growing up, he will at least have some chance of pleasing his 
mother, winning her love. Alth ough there is no evidence of disease or maln utrition in his well-to -do family, he ceases 
growing. As an adult, he is just barely five feet in height, and his marriage is unconsummated.
And then the chapter informs us th at the boy became the author of th e much-beloved children's classic— Peter Pan. J. 
M. Barrie's writings are filled with children who didn't grow up, who were fortunate enough to die in childhood, who 
came back as ghosts to  visit their mothers.
THE MECHANISMS UNDERLYING STRESS DWARFISMPage 55 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmStress dwarfism involves extremely low growth hormone levels  in the circulation. The sensitivity of growth hormone 
to psychological state has rarely been sh own as clearly as in a paper that follow ed a single child with stress dwarfism. 
When brought to the hospital, he was a ssigned to a nurse who spent a great deal  of time with him and to whom he 
became very attached. Row A in the tabl e below shows his physiolo gical profile upon entering  the hospital: extremely 
low growth hormone levels and a low rate of growth. Row B shows his profile a few months later, while still in the 
hospital: growth hormone levels have more than doubled (without his having received any synthetic hormones), and 
the growth rate has more than tripled. The
A Demonstration of the Sensitivit y of Growth to Emotional State
Condition Growth hormone Growth Food intake
A. Entry into hospital 5.9 0.5 1663B. 100 days later 13.0 1.7 1514
C. Favorite nurse on vacation 6.9 0.6 1504
D. Nurse returns 15.0 1.5 1521
Source: From Saenger and colleagues, 1977. Growth hormone is measured in nanograms of the hormone per milliliter 
of blood following insulin stimulation; growth is expresse d as centimeters per 20 days. Food intake is expressed in 
calories consumed per day.
stress dwarfism is not a problem of insufficient food—the boy was eating more at the time he entered the hospital than 
a few months later, when his growth resumed.
Row C profiles the period when the nu rse went on a three-week vacation. De spite the same food intake, growth 
hormone levels and growth plummeted. Fi nally, Row D shows the boy's profile af ter the nurse returned from vacation. 
This is extraordinary. To take a concrete, nuts and bolts f eature of growth, the rate at which this child was depositing 
calcium in his long bones could be succe ssfully predicted by his proximity to a loved one. You can't ask for a clearer 
demonstration that what is going on in our heads influences ever y cell in our bodies.
Why do growth hormone levels decline in these kids? Growth  hormone is secreted by the pituitary gland, which in 
turn is regulated by the hypothalamus in the brain (see chapter 2) . The hypothalamus controls the release of growth 
hormone through the secretion of a stimulatory hormone and an inhibitory one, and it looks as if stress dwarfism 
involves too much release of the inhibitory hormone. Stre ss-induced overactivity of th e sympathetic nervous system 
may play some role in this. Furthermore, the body becomes less responsive to what little growth hormone is actually 
secreted. Therefore, even ad ministering synthetic growth  hormone doesn't necessarily  solve the growth problem. 
Some stress dwarfism kids have elevated glucocorticoid levels, and the hormone blunts  growth hormone release as 
well as responsiveness of the body to growth hormone.
Kids with stress dwarfism also have gastrointestinal problem s, in that they're impaired at absorbing nutrients from 
their intestines.
This is probably because of the enhanced activity of their sympathetic nervous syst ems. As discussed in chapter 5, this 
will halt the release of various digestive enzymes, stop the mu scular contractions of the stomach and intestinal walls, 
and block nutrient absorption.
This tells us something about which stress hormones shut down growth. But what is it about being reared under 
pathological conditions that causes a failure of skeletal  growth? Cynthia Kuhn and Saul Schanberg of Duke 
University and, in separate studies, Myron Hofer of the New York State Psyc hiatric Institute, have examined that 
question in infant rats separated from their mothers. Is it  the smell of Mom that would normally stimulate growth? Is it 
something in her milk? Do the rats get chilly without her? Is it the rat lullabies that she sings? You can imagine the 
various ways scientists test for these possibilities—playing recordings of Mom's vocalizations, pumping her odor into 
the cage, seeing what subs titutes for the real thing.Page 56 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmIt turns out to be touch, and it has to be active touching. Separate a baby rat from its mother and its growth hormone 
levels plummet. Allow it contact with its mother while she is anesthetized, and growth hormone is still low. Mimic 
active licking by the mother by stroking the rat pup in the proper pattern, and growth normalizes. In a similar set of 
findings, other investigators have observed that handling neonatal rats causes them to grow faster and larger.
The same seems to apply in humans, as demonstrated in a classic study. Tiffany Field of the University of Miami 
School of Medicine, along with Schanberg, Kuhn, and others, performed an incredibly simple experiment that was 
inspired both by the rat research and by the history of the di smal mortality rates in orphan ages and pediatric wards, as 
discussed earlier. Studying premature infants in neonatology wards, they noted that the premature kids, while 
pampered and fretted over and maintained in near-sterile conditions, were hardly ever touched. So Field and crew 
went in and started touching them: fifteen-minute periods, three times a day, stroking their bodies, moving their limbs. 
It worked wonders. The kids grew nearly  50 percent faster, were more active an d alert, matured faster behaviorally, 
and were released from the ho spital nearly a week earlier  than the premature infants who weren't touched. Months 
later, they were still doing better than infants who hadn't been  touched. If this were done in every neonatology ward, 
this would not only make for a lot more healthy infants, but  would save approximately a billion dollars annually. It's 
rare that the highest technology of medical instrumentation—MR I machines, artificial or gans, pacemakers—has the 
potential for as much impact as this simple intervention.
Pigtailed macaque mother and infant.
Touch is one of the central experiences of  an infant. We readily think of stressors as consisting of various unpleasant 
things that can be done to an organism. Sometimes a stressor can be the failure to provide something essential, and the 
absence of touch is seemingly one of the most ma rked developmental stressors that we can suffer.
STRESS AND GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION IN HUMANS
The pattern of growth hormone secretion during stress differs  in humans from rodents, and the implications can be 
fascinating. But the subject is a tough one, not meant for the fainthearted. So feel free to go to the bathroom now and 
come back at the ne xt commercial break.
When a rat is first stressed, growth hormone levels in th e circulation decline almost im mediately. If the stressor 
continues, growth hormone levels remain depressed. And as we have seen, in humans major and prolonged stressors 
cause a decrease in growth hormone levels as well. The weird thing is that during the period immediately following 
the onset of stress, growth hormone levels actually go up in humans and some other species. In these species, in other 
words, short-term stress act ually stimulates growth hormone secretion for a time.Page 57 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhy? As was mentioned, growth hormone has two classes of  effects. In the first, it stimulates somatomedins to 
stimulate bone growth and cell division. This is the growing part of the story. But in addition, growth hormone works 
directly on fat cells, breaking down fat stores and flushing th em into the circulation. This is the energy for the growth. 
In effect, growth hormone not only runs the construction site  for the new building, but arranges financing for the work 
as well.
Now that business about breaking down stored energy and flushing it into the circulation should sound familiar—
that's precisely what glucocorticoids, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and glucagon are doing during that sprint from the 
lion. So those direct growth hormone actions are similar to the energy mobilization that occurs during stress, while the 
somatomedin-mediated growth hormone actions are not what you want to be doing. During stress, therefore, it is 
adaptive to secrete growth hor mone insofar as it helps to mobilize energy, but a bad move to secrete growth hormone 
insofar as it stimulates an expens ive, long-term pr oject like growth.
As noted, during stress, somatomedin secretion is inhibited, as is the sensitivity of the body to that hormone. This is 
perfect—you secrete growth hormone during stress and still ge t its energy-mobilizing effect s, while blocking its more 
explicit growth-promoting effects. To extend the metaphor used earlier, growth hormone has just taken out cash from 
the bank, aiming to fund the next six months of constructi on; instead, the cash is used to  solve the body's immediate 
emergency.
Given this clever solution—sp are the growth hormone, block the somatomedins—why should growth hormone levels 
decline at all during stress (whe ther immediately, as in the rat, or after a while, as in humans)? It is probably because 
the system does not work pe rfectly—somatomedin action is not completely  shut down during stress. Therefore, the 
energy-mobilizing effects of growth hormone might still be used for growth. Perhaps the timing of the decline of 
growth hormone levels in each speci es is a compromise between the
trait triggered by the hormone that is good news  during stress and the trait that is undesirable.
What impresses me is how careful and calculating the body has to be during stress in order to coordinate hormonal 
activities just right. It must perfectly  balance the costs and benefits, knowi ng exactly when to stop secreting the 
hormone. If the body miscalculates in one direction and growth hormone secretion is blocked too early, there is 
relatively less mobilization of energy for dealing with the stre ssor. If it miscalculates in the other direction and growth 
hormone secretion goes on too long, stress may actually enhance growth. One oft-quoted study suggests that the 
second type of error occurs during some stressors.
In the early 1960s, Thomas Landauer of Dartmouth and Jo hn Whiting of Harvard methodically studied the rites of 
passages found in various non-Western societies around the world; they wanted to know whether the stressfulness of 
the ritual was related to how tall the kids wound up being as adults. Landauer and Whiting classified cultures 
according to whether and when they subject ed their children to physi cally stressful development rites. Stressful rites 
included piercing the nose, lips,  or ears; circumcision, inoculation, scarification, or cauterization; stretching or binding 
of limbs, or shaping the head; exposure to hot baths, fire, or intense sunlight; exposure to cold baths, snow, or cold air; 
emetics, irritants, and enemas; rubbing with sand, or scraping with a shell or other sharp object. (And you thought 
having to play the piano at age ten for your grandmother's friends was a stressful rite of passage.)
Reflecting the anthropological tunnel vi sion of the time, Landauer and Whiting only studied males. They examined 
eighty cultures around the world and car efully controlled for a potential problem with the data—they collected 
examples from cultures from the same gene pools, with  and without those stressful rituals. For example, they 
compared the West African tribes of th e Yoruba (stressful rituals) and Ashanti (nonstressful), and similarly matched 
Native American tribes. With this appr oach, they attempted to control for gene tic contributions to stature (as well as 
nutrition, since related ethnic groups were likely to have  similar diets) and to examine cultural differences instead.
Given the effects of stress on growth, it was not surprising that among cultures where kids of ages six to fifteen went 
through stressful maturational rituals, growth was inhibited (relative to cultures without such rituals, the difference 
was about 1.5 inches). Surprisingly, going through such rituals at ages two to six had no effect on growth. And most 
surprising, in culture s in which those rituals took place with
kids under two years of age, growth was stimulated—adults were about 2.5 inches taller  than in cultures without 
stressful rituals.
There are some possible confounds  that could explain the results. One is fairly silly—maybe tall tribes like to put their 
young children through stressful rituals. One is more plausible—maybe putting very young children through these 
stressful rituals kills a certain percentage of them, and wh at doesn't kill you makes you stronger and taller. Landauer 
and Whiting noted that possibility and could not rule it out. In addition, even though they attempted to pair similar 
groups, there may have been differences other than just th e stressfulness of the rites of passage—perhaps in diet or 
child-rearing practices. Not surprisingly, no one has ever measured levels of growth hormone or somatomedins, in, 
say, Shilluk or Hausa kids while they are undergoing some  grueling ritual, so there is  no direct endocrine evidence Page 58 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthat such stressors actually stimulate growth hormone s ecretion in a way that incr eases growth. Despite these 
problems, these cross-cultural studies ha ve been interpreted by many biological  anthropologists as evidence that some 
types of stressors in humans can actually stimulate growth, amid the broader literature showing the growth-
suppressing effects of stress.
ENOUGH ALREADY
So there's a whole bunch of ways that  prenatal or early childhood stress can  have bad and long-term consequences. 
This can be anxiety provoking; it gets me into a storm of parental agitation just to write about this. Let's figure out 
what's worrisome and what's not.
First, can fetal or childhood exposure to synthetic glucocorticoids have lifelong, adverse effects? Glucocorticoids 
(such as hydrocortisone) are prescribed  in vast amounts, because of their immunosuppressive or  anti-inflammatory 
effects. During pregnancy, they are ad ministered to women with certain endocr ine disorders or wh o are at risk for 
delivering preterm. Heavy administration of them during pregnancy has been reported to result in children with 
smaller head circumferences, emotional and behavioral pr oblems in childhood, and slowing of some developmental 
landmarks. Are these effects lifelong? No  one knows. At this point, the experts have weighed in emphatically stating 
that a single round of glucocorticoids during either fetal or postnatal life has no advers e effects, though there is 
potential for problems with heavy use. But heavy doses of glucocorticoids are not
administered unless there's a serious illne ss going on, so the most prudent advice is  to minimize their use clinically but 
to recognize that the alternative, the disease that prompted the treatment in the first place, is most probably worse.
What about prenatal or postnatal stress?  Does every little hiccup of stress leav e an adverse scar forever after, unto 
multiple generations? Many times, some relationship in bi ology may apply to extreme si tuations—massive trauma, a 
whole winter's famine, and so on—but not to more everyday  ones. Unfortunatel y, even the normal  range of birth 
weights predicts adult glucocorticoid levels and the risk of  Metabolic syndrome. So these appear not to be phenomena 
only of the extremes.
Next important question: How big are the effects? We've s een evidence that increasing am ounts of fetal stress, over 
the normal range, predict incr easing risk of Metabolic synd rome long afterward. That statement may be true and 
describes one of two very different scenario s. For example, it could be that the lowest levels of fetal stress result in a 1 
percent risk of Metabolic syndrome, and each increase in st ress exposure increases the ri sk until an exposure to a 
maximal fetal stress results in a 99 per cent chance. Or the least fetal stress co uld result in a 1 percent risk, and each 
increase in stress exposure in creases the risk until exposure to maximal feta l stress results in a 2 percent risk. In both 
cases, the endpoint is sensitive to small incr ements in the amount of stress, but the power of fetal stress to increase 
disease risk is vastly greater in the fi rst scenario. As we will see in more de tail in later chapters, early stress and 
trauma seem to have a tremendous powe r in increasing the risk of  various psychiatric disorders many years later. 
Some critics of the FOAD literature seem to be of the opin ion that it constitutes cool biology of the "Gee whiz, isn't 
nature amazing" variety, but is not a major source of worry. However, the risks of some of  these adult diseases vary 
manyfold as a function of birth weight—so these strike me as big effects.
Next question: Regardless of how powerful these effects are, how inevitable are they? Lose it once in a crazed, 
sleepless moment at two in the morning and yell at your colicky infant and is that it, have you just guaranteed more 
clogging of her arteries in 2060? Not remotely. As discussed, stress dwarfism is reversible with a different 
environment. Studies have shown that the lifelong changes in glucocorticoid levels in prenatally stressed rats can be 
prevented with particular mothering styles postnatally. Much  of preventative medicine is  a demonstration that vast 
numbers of adverse health situa tions can be reversed—in fact, th at is a premise of this book.
The Cornell anthropologist Merideth Small has written a wonderfully un-neurotic book, Our Babies, Ourselves, which 
looks at child-rearing practices across the planet. In a particular  culture, how often is a child typically held by parents, 
by non-parents? Do babies sleep alone ever  and, if so, starting at wh at age? What is the aver age length of time that a 
child cries in a particular culture be fore she is picked up and comforted?
In measure after measure, westernized soci eties and, in particular, the United St ates, come out at the extreme in these 
cross-cultural measures, with our emphasis on individuality, independence, and self-reliance. This is our world of both 
parents working outside the home, of single-parent househol ds, of day care and latchkey kids. There is little evidence 
that any of these childhood expe riences leave indelible biologi cal scars, in contrast to th e results of horrific childhood 
trauma. But whatever style of child-rear ing is practiced, it will have its consequences. Small makes a profound point. 
You begin by reading her book assuming it is going to be an assortment box of prescriptions, that at the end, you'll 
emerge with a perfect combo for your kids, a mixture of the Kw akiutl Baby Diet, the Tr obriand Sleeping Program, 
and the Ituri Pygmy Infant Aerobics Pl an. But, Small emphasizes , there is no perfect, "nat ural" program. Societies 
raise their children so that they grow in to adults who behave in a way valued by that society. As Harry Chapin sang in 
"Cat's in the Cradle," that ode to baby boomer remorse, "My boy was just like me."Page 59 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmGROWTH AND
GROWTH HORMONE IN ADULTS
Personally I don't grow much anymore, except wider. According to the textbooks, another half-dozen Groundhog 
Days or so and I'm going to start shrinking. Yet I, like other adults, still secrete growth hormone into my circulation 
(although much less frequently than when I was an adolescent) . What good is it in an adult?
Like the Red Queen in Alice in Wonderland, the bodies of adults have to work harder and harder just to keep standing 
in the same place. Once the growth period of youth is fini shed and the edifice is comple te, the hormones of growth 
mostly work at rebuilding and remodeling—shoring up the sagging foundation, plastering the cracks that appear here 
and there.
Much of this repair work takes place in bone. Most of us  probably view our bones as pr etty boring and phlegmatic—
they just sit there,
inert. In reality, they are dynamic outposts of activity. They  are filled with blood vessels, with little fluid-filled canals, 
with all sorts of cell types that are actively growing and dividing. New bone is constantly being formed, in much the 
same way as in a teenager. Old bone is being broken down, disintegrated by ravenous enzymes (a process called 
resorption). New calcium is shuttled in from the bloods tream; old calcium is flushe d away. Growth hormone, 
somatomedins, parathyroid hormone, and vitamin D stand around in hard hats, supervising the project.
Why all the tumult? Some of this bustle is because bo nes serve as the Federal Reserve for the body's calcium, 
constantly giving and collecting loans of calcium to and from other organs. And part is for the sake of bone itself, 
allowing it to gradually rebuild and change its shape in response to need. How else do cowboys' bow-legged legs get 
bowed from too much time on a horse? The process has to be kept well balanced. If the bones sequester too much of 
the body's calcium, much of the rest of the body shuts down ; if the bones dump too much  of their calcium into the 
bloodstream, they become fragil e and prone to fracture, and that excess circulating calcium  can start form ing calcified 
kidney stones.
Predictably, the hormones of stress wreak havoc with the trafficking of calcium, biasing bone toward disintegration, 
rather than growth. The main culprits are glucocorticoids. They inhibit the growth of new bone by disrupting the 
division of the bone-precursor cells in the ends of bones . Furthermore, they reduce th e calcium supply to bone. 
Glucocorticoids block the uptake of di etary calcium in the inte stines (uptake normally st imulated by vitamin D), 
increase the excretion of calcium by the ki dney, and accelerate the resorption of bone.
If you secrete excessive amounts of glucoc orticoids, this increases the risk that  your bones will eventually give you 
problems. This is seen in people with Cushing's syndrome (in which glucocorticoids are secreted at immensely high 
levels because of a tumor), and in people being treated with high doses of glucoc orticoids to control some disease. In 
those cases, bone mass decreases markedly, and patients are at greater risk for osteoporo sis (softening and weakening 
of bone).* Any situation that greatly el evates glucocorticoid concentrations in the bloodstream is a particular problem 
for older people, in whom bone
* JFK had a famously bad back, which his public ists always attributed to the injuries he  sustained in the PT109 disaster in Wor ld War II. The recent 
opening of his sealed medical records indicate that it was probably  due to severe osteoporosis, du e to the massive levels of sy nthetic glucocorticoids 
he took for his Addison's disease and colitis.
resorption is already predominant (in cont rast to adolescents, in whom bone growth predominates, or young adults, in 
which the two processes are balanced). This is especially a problem in older women. Tremendous attention is now 
being paid to the need for calcium supplements to preven t osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Estrogen potently 
inhibits bone resorption, and as estrogen levels drop afte r menopause, the bones suddenly begin to degenerate.* A 
hefty regimen of glucocorticoids on top of that is the last thing you need.
These findings suggest that chronic st ress can increase the risk of osteoporo sis and cause skeletal atrophy Most 
clinicians would probably say that the glucocorticoi d effects on bone are "pha rmacological" rather than 
"physiological." This means that normal (physiological) levels of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream, even those in 
response to normal stressful events, ar e not enough to damage bone. Instead, it takes pharmacological levels of the 
hormone (far higher than the body can normally generate), due to a tumor or to ingestion of prescription 
glucocorticoids, to cause thes e effects. However, work from Jay Kaplan's  group has shown that chronic social stress 
leads to loss of bone mass in female monkeys.
A FINAL WORD ABOUT THE L-WORD
In looking at research on how stress and understimulation can disrupt growth and increase the risk s of all sorts of 
diseases, a theme pops up repeatedly: an infant human or animal can be we ll fed, maintained at an adequate Page 60 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmtemperature, peered at nervously, and ministered to by the best of neonatologists, yet still not thrive. Something is still 
missing. Perhaps we can even risk scientific credibility and detachment and mention the word love here, because that 
most ephemeral of phenomena lu rks between the lines of this chapter. Some thing roughly akin to love is needed for 
proper biological development, and its  absence is among the most aching, di storting stressors that we can suffer. 
Scientists and physicians and other caregivers have ofte n been dim at recognizing it s importance in the mundane 
biological processes by which organs and tissues grow and develop. For example, at th e beginning of the twentieth 
century the leading expe rt on child-rearing
* To reiterate a point from chap ter 3, while right now it is wildly controvers ial whether estrogen protects from cardiovascular  disease, it remains 
clear that it protects from osteoporosis.
was a Dr. Luther Holt of Columbia University, who warned pa rents of the adverse effects of the "vicious practice" of 
using a cradle, picking up the child when it cried, or handling it too often. All the experts believed that affection not 
only wasn't needed for development but was a squishy, messy thing that kept kids from becoming upright, 
independent citizens. Yet young organisms were able to teach  about how these savants were  wrong in a classic set of 
studies begun in the 1950s—studies that are, in my opinion, among the most haunting and troubling of all the pages of 
science.
The work was carried out by the psychologist Harry Harlow of the University of Wisconsin, a renowned and 
controversial scientist. Psychology at that time was domi nated by either Freudians or a rather extreme school of 
thought called behaviorism, in which beha vior (of an animal or a human) was thought to operate according to rather 
simple rules: an organism does somethi ng more frequently because it has been re warded for it in the past; an organism 
does something less frequently because it has failed to be rewarded, or has even  been punished for that behavior. In 
this view, just a few basic things like hunger, pain, or sex lie at the basis of rein forcement. Look at the behaviors, view 
organisms as machines responding to stimuli, and devel op a predictive mathematics built around the idea of rewards 
and punishments.
Harlow helped to answer a seemingly obvious question in a non-obvious way. Why do infants become attached to 
their mothers? Because Mom supplies food . For behaviorists, this was obvious, as attachment was thought to arise 
solely from the positive reinforcement of food. For Freudians, it was also obvious—infants were thought to lack the 
"ego development" to form a relationship with any thing/ one other than Mom's breast. For physicians influenced by 
the likes of Holt, it was obvious and convenient—no need for mothers to visit hospitalized infants—anyone with a 
bottle would supply attachment needs. No need to worry ab out preemies kept antiseptically isolated in incubators—
regular feeding suffices for human contact. No need for children in orphanages to be touched, held, noted as individuals. What's love got to do with healthy development?
Harlow smelled a rat. He raised infant  rhesus monkeys without mothers. Instead, he gave them a choice of two types 
of artificial "surrogate" mothers. One pseudo-mother had a monkey head constructed of wood and a wire-mesh tube 
resembling a torso. In the middle of the torso was a bottle  of milk. This surrogate mother gave nutrition. The other 
surrogate mother had a similar head and wire-mesh tors o. But instead of containing a milk bottle, this one's torso was 
wrapped inPage 61 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmInfant monkey and cloth mo ther, in a Harlow study.
terry cloth. The behaviorists and the Freudians would be s nuggling up to the milk-mom within seconds. But not the 
baby monkeys—they chose the terry-cloth mothers. Kids don't love their mothers b ecause Mom balances their 
nutritive intake, these re sults suggested. They love th em because, usually, Mom loves them back, or at least is 
someone soft to cling to. "Man cannot live by milk alone. Love is an emotion that does not need to be bottle- or spoon
-fed," wrote Harlow.
Harlow and his work remain immensely controversial.* The co ntroversy arises from the nature of his experiments and 
variations on them (for example, raising monkeys in comple te social isolation, in whic h they never see another living 
animal). These were brutal studies, and they are often among the primary on es cited by those opposed to animal 
experimentation. Mo reover, Harlow's scientific writing
* An excellent biography about Harlow, by the Pulitzer Prize-winning author Deborah Blum, is Love at Goon Park: Harry Harlow and the Science 
of Affection (Perseus 2002).
displayed an appalling callousness to th e suffering of these animal s—I remember as a student being moved to tears of 
rage by the savage indifference of his writing.
But at the same time, these studies have been extremely useful (alt hough my feeling is that there should have been far 
fewer of them carried out). They have taught us the scien ce of why we primates love individuals who treat us badly, 
why the mistreatment can at times increas e the love. They have taught us about why being abused as  a child increases 
the risk of your being an abusive adult. Other aspects of Harlow's work have taught us how repeated separations of 
infants from their mothers can predispose those in dividuals to depression when they are adults.
The irony is that it required Harlow's pioneering work to de monstrate the unethical nature of that work. But wasn't it 
obvious before? If you prick us, do we not bleed?; if you soci ally isolate us as infants, do we not suffer? Few in the 
know thought so. The main point of Harl ow's work wasn't teaching what we mi ght now wrongly assu me to have been 
obvious then, namely that if you isolate an infant monkey, it  is a massive stressor, and th at she saddens and suffers for 
long after. It was to teach the utterly novel fact that if you do the same to a human infant, the same occurs.
7
SEX AND REPRODUCTIONPage 62 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmKidneys and pancreas and h eart are important, but what
we really want to know is why, when we are being
stressed, our menstrual cycles  become irregular, erections
are more difficult to achieve, and we lose our interest in
sex. As it turns out, there are an astonishing number of
ways in which reproductive mechan isms may go awry when we are
upset.
MALES: TESTOSTERONE AND LOSS OF ERECTIONS
It makes sense to start simple, so let's initially consider th e easier reproductive system, that of males. In the male, the 
brain releases the hormone LHRH (lutei nizing hormone releasing hormone), which stimulates the pituitary to release 
LH (luteinizing hormone) and FSH (follicle-stimulating horm one).* LH, in turn, stimulates the testes to release 
testosterone. Since men don't have follicles to be stimulat ed by follicle-stimulating hormone, FSH instead stimulates 
sperm production. This is the reproductive system of your basic off-the-rack male.
With the onset of a stressor, the whole system is inhibited.  LHRH concentrations decline,  followed shortly thereafter 
by declines in LH and FSH, and then the testes clos e for lunch. The result is a dec line in circulating testosterone 
levels. The most vivid demonstrations of this
* LHRH is also known as GnRH, or  "gonadotropin releasing hormone."Page 63 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA simplified version of male reproductive endocrinology. The hypothalamus releases LHRH into the private 
circulatory system that it shares with the anterior pituit ary. LHRH triggers the release by the pituitary of LH and 
FSH, which work at the testes to cause testosterone secretion and sperm production.
occur during physical stress. If a male goes through surgery, within seconds of the first slice of a scalpel through his 
skin, the reproductive axis begins to shut down. Injury , illness, starvation, surger y—all of these drive down 
testosterone levels. Anthropologists have even shown that in human societies in which there is constant energetic 
stress (for example, those of rural Nepalese villagers), th ere are significantly lower test osterone levels than among 
sedentary Bostonian controls.
But subtle psychological stressors are ju st as disruptive. Lower the dominance rank of a social primate and down go 
his testosterone levels. Put a person or a monkey through a stressful learning task and the same occurs. In a celebrated 
study several decades ago, U.S. Officer  Candidate School train ees who underwent an enor mous amount of physical 
and psychological stress were subjected to  the further indignity of having to pee into Dixie cups so that military 
psychiatrists could measure their hormone levels. Lo and be hold, testosterone levels were down; maybe not to the 
levels found in cherubic babies, but still it's worth keeping in mind the next time you see some leatherneck at a bar 
bragging about his circulating androgen concentrations.
Why do testosterone concentrations plunge with the onset of a stressor? For a variety of r easons. The first occurs at 
the brain. With the onset of stress, two important classes of hormones, the endorphins and enkephalins (mostly the 
former), act to block the release of LHRH from the hypothala mus. As will be discussed in chapter 9, endorphins play Page 64 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htma role in blocking pain perception and ar e secreted in response to exercise (h elping to account for the famed "runner's 
high" or "endorphin high" that hits many hardy joggers around the 30-minute mark). If males secrete endorphins when 
they are experiencing runner's high, an d these compounds inhibit testosterone release, will exercise suppress male 
reproduction? Sometimes. Males who do  extreme amounts of exer cise, such as professi onal soccer players and 
runners who cover more than 40 or 50 miles a week, have less LHRH, LH, and testosterone in their circulation, 
smaller testes, less functional sperm. They also have higher le vels of glucocorticoids in their bloodstreams, even in the 
absence of stress. (A similar decline in reproductive function is found in men who are addicted to opiate drugs.) To 
jump ahead to the female section, reproductive dysfunction is also seen in women athletes, an d this is at least partially 
due to endorphin release as well. Up to half of competitive runners have menstrual irregularities, and highly athletic 
girls reach puberty later than usual. For example, in one study of fourteen-year-olds, ap proximately 95 percent of 
control subjects had started menstruating, whereas only 20 percent of gymnasts and 40 percent of runners had.
This brings up a broader issue important to our era of lookin ' good. Obviously, if you don't exercise at all, it is not 
good for you. Exercise improves your health. And a lot of ex ercise improves your health a lot. But that doesn't mean 
that insanely large amounts of exercise are insanely good for your body. At some point, too much begins to damage 
various physiological systems. Everything in physiology foll ows the rule that too much can  be as bad as too little. 
There are optimal points of al lostatic balance. For example,  while a moderate amount of exercise generally increases 
bone mass, thirty-year-old athletes who run 40 to 50 miles a week can wind up  with decalcified bones, decreased bone 
mass, increased risk of stress fractures and scoliosis (sideways curv ature of the spine)—their skeletons look like those 
of seventy-year-olds.
To put exercise in perspective, imagine this: sit with a group of hunter-gatherers from the African grasslands and 
explain to them that in our world we ha ve so much food and so much free time th at some of us run 26 miles in a day, 
simply for the sheer pleasure of it. They  are likely to say, "Are you crazy? That's stressful." Throughout hominid 
history, if you're running 26 miles in a day, you're either  very intent on eating someone or someone's very intent on 
eating you.
Thus, we have a first step. With the onset of stress, LHRH secretion declines. In addition, prolactin, another pituitary 
hormone that is released during major stressors, decreases the sensitivity of the pituitary to LHRH. A double 
whammy—less of the hormone dribbling out of the brain, and the pituitary no longer responding as effectively to it. 
Finally, glucocorticoids block the response of the testes to  LH, just in case any of that hormone manages to reach 
them during the stressor (and serious at hletes tend to have pretty dramatic elevations of glucocorticoids in their 
circulation, no doubt adding to the reproductive problems just discussed).
A decline in testosterone secretion is only half the story of what goes wrong with male reproduction during stress. The 
other half concerns the nervous syst em and erections. Getting an erection to  work properly is so incredibly 
complicated physiologically that if men ever actually had to understand it, none of us would be here. Fortunately, it 
runs automatically. In order for a male pr imate to have an erection, he has to divert a considerable  amount of blood 
flow to his penis, engorging it.*
* Weirdly, Da Vinci was the first to demonstrate (how!?) that er ections arise from increased blood flow to the penis. He also w rote that, "The penis 
does not obey the order of its master. . .. [It] must be said to have a mind of its  own." When combining his statement and scie ntific observation, it's 
only a few short steps to the fa med wisecrack and near truism th at a man can't have blood flow to his penis and brain simultane ously.
Page 65 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmOverexercise can have a variety of dele terious effects. {Left) Max Ernst, Health Through Sport, photographic 
enlargement of a photomontage mounted on wood, 1920; (right) Above the Clouds Midnight Passes, collage with 
fragments of photographs and pencil, 1920.
This is accomplished by activating his parasympathetic ner vous system. In other words,  the guy has to be calm, 
vegetative, relaxed.
What happens next, if you are male? You are having a terr ific time with someone. Ma ybe you are breathing faster, 
your heart rate has increased. Gradually, parts of your body are taking on a sympathetic tone—remember the four F's 
of sympathetic function introduced in chapter 2. After awhile, most of your body is screaming sympathetic while, 
heroically, you are trying to hold on to parasympathetic tone in that one lone outpost as long as possible. Finally, 
when you can't take it anymore, the parasympathetic shuts off at the penis, the sympathe tic comes roaring on, and you 
ejaculate. (Incredibly complicated choreo graphy between these two systems; don't try this unsupervised.) This new 
understanding generates tricks that sexual therapists advise—if you are close to ejaculating and don't want to yet, take 
a deep breath. Expanding the chest muscles briefly triggers a parasympathetic volley that defers the shift from 
parasympathetic to sympathetic.
What, then, changes during stress? One is that sufficient prior stress will damage and clog up your blood vessels—
severe vascular disease can seriously impede blood flow. Bu t what if you're stressed in that immediate situation? 
Well, obviously, if you're nervous or anxious, you're not calm or vegetative. First, it becomes difficult to establish 
parasympathetic activity if you are nervous or anxious. You have trouble having an erection. Impotency. And if you 
already have the erection, you get in trouble as well. You' re rolling along, parasympathetic to your penis, having a 
wonderful time. Suddenly, you find yourself worrying about the strength of the dollar versus the euro and—
shazaam—you switch from parasympathetic to sympathetic far faster than you want ed. Premature ejaculation.
It is extremely common for problems with impotency an d premature ejaculatio n to arise during stressful times. 
Furthermore, this can be co mpounded by the fact that erectile dysfunction is a major stressor on its own, getting men 
into this vicious performance an xiety cycle of fearing fear itself. A number of studies have shown that more than half 
the visits to doctors by males complaining of reproductive dysfunction turn out to be due to "psychogenic" impotency 
rather than organic impotency (there's no disease there, just too much stress). How do you tell if it is organic or 
psychogenic impotency? This is actuall y diagnosed with surprising ease, b ecause of a quirky thing about human 
males. As soon as they go to sleep  and enter REM (rapid eye movement) dream sleep, they get erections. I've 
consulted with Earth's penis experts, and no one is sure why this should occur, but that's how it works.* So a man 
comes in complaining that he hasn't been able to have an erection in six months. Is he just under stress? Does he have 
some neurological disease? Take a handy little penile cuff w ith an electronic pressure transducer attached to it. Have 
him put it on just before he goes to sleep. By the next morning you may have your answer—if this guy gets an 
erection when he goes into REM sleep, hi s problem is likely to be psychogenic.+
* There's some great speculations, however: "T o trigger sexual themes during dreams" (r aising the question, of course, of what good is that). "So 
the body can practice at having erections, in preparation for the real thing." "Because."
+ I've been told about an advance on this technology. Instead of  having to use one of these fancy electronic cuffs that seems l ikely to electrocute 
you during the night, and thus co nstitutes a stressor on its own, here's what y ou do. Take a string of (I don't specify how man y) postage stamps. 
Wrap it around the guy's penis, moisten the last one, tape it to  the others, forming a postage stamp ring. The next morning, ch eck: if the stamps have 
been pulled loose on one side or torn, the guy had a REM-stage erection during the night—fabulous , a lab result for a couple of  bucks. The 
insurance people will hassle you ab out reimbursement for it, though.
Thus, stress will knock out erections quite readily. In genera l, the problems with erections are more disruptive than 
problems with testosterone secretion. Testosterone and sperm production have to shut down almost entirely to affect 
performance. A little testosterone and a couple of sperm wa ndering around and most males can muddle through. But 
no erection, and forget about it.*
The erectile component is exquisitely sensitive to stress in an incredible array of species . Nonetheless, there are some 
circumstances where stress does not supp ress the reproductive system in a male. Suppose you're some big bull moose 
and it's mating season. You're spending all your time strutting your stuff and growing your antlers and snorting and 
having head-butting territorial disputes with the next guy and forgetting to eat right and not getting enough sleep and 
getting injured and worrying about the competition for some female moose's favors.+ Stressful. Wouldn't it be pretty 
maladaptive if the male-male competitive behaviors needed to get the opportunity to mate were so stressful that when 
the opportunity came, you were sexually dysfunctional? Not a good Darwinian move.
Or suppose that in your species, sex is this wildly meta bolically demanding activity, involving hours, even days of 
copulation at the cost of resting or feeding (lions fall in this category, for ex ample). High energetic demands plus little 
eating or sleeping equals stress. It would be disadvantageous if the stress of mating caused erectile dysfunction.
It turns out that in a lot of species, stressors associated with mating season co mpetition or with mating itself not only 
don't suppress the reproductive system, but can stimulate it a bit. In some species where this applies, the seeming Page 66 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmstressor doesn't cause secretion of stress hormones; in  other cases, the stress hormones are secreted but the 
reproductive system becomes insensitive to them.
And then there is one species which, regardless of whether it is mating s eason or not, breaks al l the rules concerning 
the effects of stress on erectile  function. It is time we had a little talk about hyenas.
* It is important to note that an inability to have an erection is not synonymous with an ab sence of desire. This is illustrate d by a story I once read 
about Marx in his old age— Grouc ho in this case. A visitor to his home was admiring his various awards and com-memoratives of h is career. Marx 
waved them away saying, I'd trade them a ll for one good erection. Stress can most ce rtainly squelch desire, independent of disr upting erections, 
through mechanisms that are poorly understood.
+ Actually, I have no idea if moose grow an tlers during mating season, or even if thos e things that Bullwinkle had on top of his  head are technically 
called antlers or horns or what have you's, but you get the point—all this macho male display stuff.
OUR FRIEND, THE HYENA
The spotted hyena is a vastly unappreciated , misrepresented beast. I know this b ecause over the years,  in my work in 
East Africa, I have shared my campsite with the hyena biologist Laurence Frank of the University of California at 
Berkeley. For lack of distracting television, radio, or telephone, he has devoted his time with me to singing the hyena's 
praises. They are wondrous animals who have gotten a bad rap from the press.
We all know the scenario. It's dawn on the sa vanna. Marlin Perkins of Mutual of Omaha's Wild Kingdom is there 
filming lions eating something dead. We are delighted, craning to get a good view of the blood and guts. Suddenly, on 
the edge of our field of vision, we spot them— skulky filthy,  untrustworthy hyenas looking to dart in and steal some 
of the food. Scavengers! We are invited to heap our contempt on them (a surprising bias, given how few of the 
carnivorous among us ever wr estle down our meals with our  canines). It wasn't until the Pentagon purchased a new 
line of infrared night-viewing scopes and decided to unload its old ones on various zoologists that, suddenly, 
researchers could watch hyenas at nigh t (important, given that hyenas mostly sleep during the day). Turns out that 
they are fabulous hunters. An d you know what happens? Lions, who are no t particularly effec tive hunters, because 
they are big and slow and conspicuous, spend most of their time keying in on hyenas and ripping off their kills. No 
wonder when it's dawn on the savanna the hyenas on the pe riphery are looking cranky, wi th circles under their eyes. 
They stayed up all night hunting that thing, and who's having breakfast now?
Having established a thread of sympathy  for these beasts, let me explain what  is really strange about them. Among 
hyenas, females are socially dominant , which is fairly rare among mammals . They are more muscular and more 
aggressive, and have more of a male sex horm one (a close relative of testosterone called androstenedione) in their 
bloodstreams than males. It's also almost impossible to te ll the sex of a hyena by looking at its external genitals.
More than two thousand years ago, Aristotle, for reasons obscure to even the most l earned, dissected some dead 
hyenas, discussing them in his treatise Historia Animalium, VI, XXX. The conclusion among hyena savants at the 
time was that these animals were herm aphrodites—animals that possess all the machinery of both sexes. Hyenas are 
actually what gynecologists would call pseudohermaphrodites (they just look that way). The female has a fake scrotal 
sac made of
Behold, the female hyena.Page 67 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmcompacted fat cells; she doesn't really have a penis but, in stead, an enlarged clitoris that can become erect. The same 
clitoris, I might add, with which she has sex and through which she gives birth. It's pretty wild. Laurence Frank, who 
is one of Earth's experts on hyena genitals, will dart some animal and haul it, anestheti zed, into camp. Excitement; we 
go to check it out, and maybe twenty minutes into examining it, he kind of thinks he knows what sex this particular 
one is. (Yes, the hyenas themselves know exactly  who is which sex, most probably by smell.)
Perhaps the most interesting thing about hy enas is that there is a fairly plausibl e theory as to why they evolved this 
way, a theory complicated enoug h for me mercifully to relegate it to the endnotes. For our purposes here, what is 
important is that hyenas have evolved not only genitals that  look unique, but also unique ways to use these organs for 
social communication. This is  where stress comes into play
Among many social mammals, males have erections during co mpetitive situations as a si gn of dominance. If you are 
having a dominance display with anothe r male, you get an erection and wave it around in his face to show what a 
tough guy you are. Social primates do this all the time. However, among hyen as, an erection is a sign of social 
subordinance. When a male is menaced by a terrifying female, he gets an erection—"Look , I'm just some poor no-
account male; don't hit me, I was just leaving." Low-ranking females do the same thing; if a
low-ranking female is about to get trounced by a high-ranking one, she gets a conspicuous clitoral erection—"Look, 
I'm just like one of those males; don't attack me; you know you're dominant over me, why bother?" If you're a hyena, 
you get an erection when you are stressed. Among male hyenas, the autonomic wiring has got to be completely 
reversed in order to account for the fact  that stress causes erections. This hasn 't yet been demonstrated, but perhaps 
Berkeley scientists working on this, squandering tax dollars that could otherwise be going to Halliburton and Bechtel, 
will do it.
Thus the hyena stands as the exception to the rule about erectile functions be ing adversely affected by stress, a 
broader demonstration of the importance of looking at a zoological oddity as a means of better seeing the context of 
our own normative physiology, and a friendly word of warning before you date a hyena.
FEMALES: LENGTHENED CYCLES AND AMENORRHEA
We now turn to female reproduction. Its basic outline is sim ilar to that of the male. LHRH  is released by the brain, 
which releases LH and FSH from the pituitary. The latter stimul ates the ovaries to release eggs; the former stimulates 
ovaries to synthesize estrogen. During the first half of the me nstrual cycle, the "follicular"  stage, levels of LHRH, LH, 
FSH, and estrogen build up, head ing toward the climax of ovulation. This us hers in the second half of the cycle, the 
"luteal" phase. Progesterone, made in the corpus luteum of the ovary, now becomes the dominant hormone on the 
scene, stimulating the uterine wa lls to mature so that an egg, if fertilized  just after ovulation,  can implant there and 
develop into an embryo. Because the re lease of hormones has the fancy quality of fluctuating rhythmically over the 
menstrual cycle, the part of the hypothalamus that regul ates the release of these hormones is generally more 
structurally complicated in  females than in males.
The first way in which stress disrupts female reproduction co ncerns a surprising facet of the system. There is a small 
amount of male sex hormone in the bloodstream of females,  even non-hyena females. In human beings, this doesn't 
come from the ovaries (as in the hyenas ), but from the adrenals. The amount of  these "adrenal androgens" is only 
about 5 percent of that in males, but enough to cause trouble.* An
* Point of information: the adrenal androgens ar e usually not testoster one, but androstenedione.Page 68 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA simplified version of female reproductive endocrinology . The hypothalamus releases LHRH into the private 
circulatory system that it shares with the anterior pituitary. LHRH triggers the release by the pituitary of LH and 
FSH, which in turn bring about ovulation and hormone release from the ovaries.
enzyme in the fat cells of females usually eliminates these androgens by converting them to estrogens. Problem 
solved. But what if you are starving becau se the crops failed this year? Body weig ht drops, fat stores are depleted, and 
suddenly there isn't enough fat around to  convert all the androgen to estrogen. Less estrogen, therefore, is produced. 
More important, androgen concentrations build up, which inhibits numerous steps in the reproductive system (it 
should be noted that this is but one of the mechanisms by which starvation inhibits reproduction).
Reproduction is similarly inhibited if you starve voluntarily.  One of the hallmarks of anorexia nervosa is disruption of 
reproduction in the (typically) young women who are starving themselves. There's more to the reproduction cessation 
than just the weight loss, since cyclin g doesn't necessarily resume in women wh en they regain the weight unless the 
initial psychological stressors have been sorted out. But the weight loss still plays a critical, initiating role. And loss of 
body fat leading to androgen buildup is one of the mechanis ms by which reproduction is impaired in females who are 
extremely active physically. As noted abov e, this has been best documented in young girls who are serious dancers or 
runners, in whom puberty can be delayed for years, and in women who exercise enorm ous amounts, in whom cycles 
can become irregular or cease entirely. Ov erall, this is a logical mechanism. In  the human, an average pregnancy costs 
approximately 50,000 calories, and nursi ng costs about a thousand calories a day; neither is something that should be 
gone into without a reasonable amount of fat tucked away.Page 69 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmStress also can inhibit reproduction in ways other than sh rinkage of fat cells. Many of the same mechanisms apply as 
in the male. Endorphins and enkephalins will inhibit LHRH re lease (as discussed, this occurs in female athletes as 
readily as in males); prolactin and glucocorticoids will bloc k pituitary sensitivity to LHRH; and glucocorticoids will 
also affect the ovaries, making them less responsive to LH. The net result is lowere d secretion of LH, FSH, and 
estrogen, making the likelihood of ovulating decrease. As a result, the follicular stage is extended, making the entire 
cycle longer and less regular. At an ex treme, the entire ovulator y machinery is not merely delayed, but shut down, a 
condition termed anovulatory amenorrhea.
Stress can also cause other reproductive problems. Progester one levels are often inhibited, which disrupts maturation 
of the uterine walls. The release of prol actin during stress adds to this effect, interfering with the activity of 
progesterone. Thus, even if there is st ill enough hormonal action during the follicular period to cause ovulation, and
the egg has become fertilized, it is now much less likely to implant normally.
The loss of estrogen with sustained stress has some conseq uences beyond the reproductive realm. For example, amid 
the controversies discussed in chapter 3 about whether estrogen protects agains t cardiovascular disease, it is quite 
clear that it protects against osteoporosi s, and stress-induced declines in estr ogen levels have bad effects on bone 
strength.
Of all the hormones that inhibit the reproductive system duri ng stress, prolactin is probably the most interesting. It is 
extremely powerful and versatile; if you don't want to ovulate,  this is the hormone to have lots of in your bloodstream. 
It not only plays a major role in the suppression of repr oduction during stress and exercise, but it also is the main 
reason that breast feeding is such an effective form  of contraception.
Oh, you are shaking your head smugly at the ignorance of th is author with that Y chromo some; that's an old wives' 
tale; nursing isn't an effective contr aceptive. On the contrary, nursing works fabulously. It probably prevents more 
pregnancies than any other type of contracep tion. All you have to  do is do it right.
Breast feeding causes prolactin secretion.  There is a reflex loop  that goes straight from the nipples to the 
hypothalamus. If there is nipple stimulation for any reason  (in males as well as females), the hypothalamus signals the 
pituitary to secrete prolactin . And as we now know, prolactin in sufficient quantities causes reproduction to cease.
The problem with nurs ing as a contraceptive is how it is done in Wester n societies. During the six months or so that 
she breast-feeds, the average mo ther in the West allows perhaps half a dozen  periods of nursing a day, each for 30 to 
60 minutes. Each time she nurses, prolactin levels go up in the bloodstream within sec onds, and at the end of the 
feeding, prolactin settles back to pre-nursing levels fairly quickly. This most likely produces a scalloping sort of 
pattern in prolactin release.
This is not how most women on earth nurse. A prime example emerged a few years ago in a study of hunter-gatherer 
Bushmen in the Kalahari Desert of southern  Africa (the folks de picted in the movie The Gods Must Be Crazy). 
Bushman males and females have plenty of intercourse, and no one uses contraceptives, but the women have a child 
only about every four years. Initially, this seemed easy to explain. Western scientists looked at this pattern and said, 
"They're hunter-gatherers: life for them must be short, nasty, and brutish; they must all be starving." Malnutrition 
induces cessation of ovulation.Page 70 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA Kalahari Bushman mother with her child in a hip sling.
However, when anthropologists looked more closely, they found that the Bushmen were anything but suffering. If you 
are going to be nonwesternized, choose to be a hunter-gather er over being a nomadic pastor alist or an agriculturist. 
The Bushmen hunt and gather only a few hours a day, and spen d much of the rest of thei r time sitting around chewing 
the fat. Scientists have called them the original affluent so ciety. Out goes the idea that th e four-year birth interval is 
due to malnutrition.
Instead, the lengthy interval is probably due to their nursin g pattern. This was discovered by a pair of scientists, 
Melvin Konner and Carol Worthman.* When a hunter-gatherer woman gives birth, she
* The work and thinking of Konner, who was on ce my advisor at college, runs  throughout this book, as he is the person who has h ad the greatest 
intellectual influence on my life.
begins to breast-feed her child for a minute or two appr oximately every fifteen minutes . Around the clock. For the 
next three years. (Suddenly th is doesn't seem like such a hot idea after all,  does it?) The young child is carried in a 
sling on the mother's hip so he can nurse easily and freque ntly. At night, he sleeps near his mother and will nurse 
every so often without even waking her (as Konner and Worthman, no doubt with their infrared night-viewing 
goggles and stopwatches, scribble away on  their clipboards at two in the morn ing). Once the kid can walk, he'll come 
running in from play every hour or so to nurse for a minute.
When you breast-feed in this way, the endocrine story is very different. At the first nursing period, prolactin levels 
rise. And with the frequency and timing of the thousands of subsequent nursings, prolactin stays high for years. 
Estrogen and progesterone levels ar e suppressed, and you don't ovulate.
This pattern has a fascinating implication. Consider the life history of a hunter-gatherer woman. She reaches puberty 
at about age thirteen or fourteen (a bit later than in our  society). Soon she is pregna nt. She nurses for three years, 
weans her child, has a few menstrual cycles, becomes preg nant again, and repeats the pattern until she reaches 
menopause. Think about it: over the course of her life span , she has perhaps two dozen pe riods. Contrast that with 
modern Western women, who typically experience hundreds of periods over their life time. Huge difference. The 
hunter-gatherer pattern, the one that has occurred throughout most of human history, is what you see in nonhu-man 
primates. Perhaps some of the gynecolo gical diseases that plague modern we sternized women have something to do 
with this activation of a majo r piece of physiological machinery hundreds of  times when it may have evolved to be 
used only twenty times; an example of this is probably endometriosis (having uterine lining thickening and sloughing Page 71 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmoff in places in the pelvis and abdominal wall where it do esn't belong), which is more  common amon g women with 
fewer pregnancies and who start at a later age.*
\FEMALES: DISRUPTION OF LIBIDO
The preceding section describes how stre ss disrupts the nuts and bolts of fema le reproduction—ut erine walls, eggs, 
ovarian hormones, and so on. But what about its effects upon sexual behavior? Just
* Remarkably, the same is now being report ed in zoo animals who, becau se of the circumstances of their captivity, reproduce far  less often than 
those in the wild.
as stress does not do wonders for erections or for the desire  of a male to do something with his erections, stress also 
disrupts female libido. This is a commonplace experience among women stresse d by any number of circumstances, as 
well as among laboratory animals undergoing stress.
It is relatively easy to document a loss of sexual desire among women when they are stressed—just hand out a 
questionnaire on the subject and hope it is answered honestly. But how is sexual  drive studied in a laboratory animal? 
How can one possibly infer a libidinous itc h on the part of a female rat, for exam ple, as she gazes into the next cage at 
the male with the limpid eyes and cute  incisors? The answer is surprisingly simple—how often would she be willing 
to press a lever in order to gain access to that male? This is science's quantitative way of measuring rodent desire (or, 
to use the jargon of the trad e, "procep-tivity").* A simila r experimental design can be  used to measure pro-ceptive 
behavior in primates. Proceptive and r eceptive behaviors fluctuate among female an imals as a function of factors like 
the point in the reproductive cycle (both of these measures of sexual behavior generally peak around ovulation), the 
recency of sex, the time of year, or va garies of the heart (who is the male in question). In general, stress suppresses 
both proceptive and receptive behaviors.
This effect of stress is probably rooted in its suppression of the secretion of various sex hormones. Among rodents, 
both proceptive and receptive behaviors disappear when a female's ovaries are removed, and the absence of estrogen 
after the ovariectomy is responsible; as  evidence, injection of ov ariectomized females with estrogen reinstates these 
sexual behaviors. Moreover, the peak in estrogen levels ar ound ovulation explains why sexual behavior is almost 
entirely restricted to that period. A similar pattern holds in primates, but it is not as dram atic as in rodents. A decline 
in sexual behavior, although to a lesser extent, follows ovar iectomy in a primate. For human s, estrogen plays a role in 
sexuality, but a still weaker one—social and in terpersonal factors are far more important.
* Quick primer on how to describe animal sex the way professionals do: attractivity refers to how much the subject animal interests another animal. 
This can be operationally defined as how many times the other an imal is willing to press a lever, for example, to gain access t o the subject. 
Receptivity describes how readily the subject responds to the entreaties of the other animal. Among rats, this  can be defined by the occurr ence of the 
"lordosis" reflex, a receptive stance by th e female in which she arches her back, ma king it easier for the male to mount. Femal e primates show a 
variety of receptive reflexes that facilitate  male mounting, depend ing on the species. Proceptivity refers to how actively the subject pursues the 
other animal.
Estrogen exerts these effects both in the brain and peripheral tissue. Genitals and other parts of the body contain 
ample amounts of estrogen recep tors and are made more sens itive to tactile stimulation by the hormone. Within the 
brain, estrogen receptors occu r in areas that play a role in sexual behavior; through on e of the more poorly understood 
mechanisms of neuroendocrinology when estrogen floods those parts of the brain, salacious thoughts follow.
Surprisingly, adrenal androgens  also play a role in precep tive and receptive behaviors; as evidence, sex drive goes 
down following removal of the adrenals and can be reinstated by administration of synthetic androgens. This appears 
to be more of a factor in primates a nd humans than in rodents. While the subject has not been studied in great detail, 
there are some reports that stress suppresses the levels of adrenal androgens in the bloodstream. And stress certainly 
suppresses estrogen secretion. As noted in  chapter 3, Jay Kaplan has shown that the stressor of social subordinance in 
a monkey can suppress estrogen levels as effectively as re moving her ovaries. Given these findings, it is relatively 
easy to see how stress disrupts sexual behavior in a female.
STRESS AND THE SUCCESS OF HIGH-TECH FERTILIZATION
In terms of psychological distress, few medical maladies ma tch infertility—the strain pl aced on a relationship with a 
significant other, the disruption of daily activities and abi lity to concentrate at work, the estrangement from friends 
and family, and the rates of depression.* Thus, circumven ting infertility with recent hi gh-tech advances has been a 
wonderful medical advance.
There is now a brave new world of assisted fertilization: artificial insemination; in vitro fertilization (IVF), in which 
sperm and egg meet in a petri dish, and ferti lized eggs are then implanted in the woman; preimplantation screening, 
carried out when one of the couple has a serious genetic di sorder; after eggs are fertilized , their DNA is analyzed, and 
only those eggs that do not carry the genetic disorder arePage 72 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* Two of the most common subject s discussed in infertility support groups: (1) how to ha ndle the damage done to friendships and  family relations 
when you can no longer attend baby shower s, can no longer join the family at holid ays because of all those nieces and nephews j ust learning to 
walk, can no longer see the old friend who is pregnant; and (2) what happens to a re lationship with one's significant other whe n sex has been turned 
into a medical procedure, es pecially an unsuccessful one.
implanted. Donor eggs, donor sperm. Injection of an individual sperm into an egg, when the problem is an inability of 
the sperm to penetrate the egg's membrane on its own.
Some forms of infertility are solved with some relativel y simple procedures, but others involve extraordinary, 
innovative technology. There are two problems with that tech nology, however. The first is that it is an astonishingly 
stressful experience for the individuals who go through it. Furt hermore, it's expensive as hell, and is often not paid for 
by insurance, especially when some of the fancier new experimental techniques are being tried. How many young 
couples can afford to spend ten to fifteen thousand dollars out of pocket each cycle they attempt to  get pregnant? 
Next, most IVF clinics are located only  near major medical centers, meaning th at many participants have to spend 
weeks in a motel room in some strange city, far from friend s and family. For some genetic screening techniques, only 
a handful of places in the world are available, thus adding a long waiting list to the other stress factors.
But those stress-induced factors pale co mpared with the stress generated by th e actual process. Weeks of numerous, 
painful daily shots with synthetic hormones and hormone suppre ssors that can do some pretty dramatic things to mood 
and mental state. Daily blood draws, daily sonograms, the constant emotional roller-coaster of whether the day's news 
is good or bad: how many follicles, how big are they, what circulating hormone levels have been achieved? A surgical 
procedure and then the final wait to see whet her you have to try the whole thing again.
The second problem is that it rarely works. It is very hard to figure out how often natural attempts at fertilization 
actually succeed in humans. And it is ha rd to find out what the success rates are for the high-tech  procedures, as 
clinics often fudge the numbers in thei r brochures—"We don't like to publish our success rates, because we take on 
only the most difficult, challenging cases, and thus our numbers must superficially seem  worse than those of other 
clinics that are wimps and take only th e easy ones"—and thus, they say, it is hard to gauge just how bad the odds are 
for a couple with an infertility problem going this route. Nevertheless, going through one of those grueling IVF cycles 
has a pretty low chance of succeeding.
All that has preceded in this chapter would suggest that the fi rst problem, the stressfuln ess of IVF procedures, 
contributes to the second problem, th e low success rate. A number of researcher s have specifically examined whether 
women who are more stressed during IVF cycles are the on es less likely to have su ccessful outcomes. And the
answer is a resounding maybe. The majority of studies do  show that the more stressed women (as determined by 
glucocorticoid levels, cardiovascular reactiv ity to an experimental stressor, or  self-report on a questionnaire) are 
indeed less likely to have successful IVFs . Why, then, the ambiguity? For one thing, some of the studies were carried 
out many days or weeks into the long process, where wome n have already gotten plenty of feedback as to whether 
things are going well; in those cases, an emerging unsuccessful outcome migh t cause the elevated stress-response, 
rather than the other way around. Even in studies in which stress measures are taken at the beginning of the process, 
the number of previous cycles must be controlled for. In other words, a stressed woman may indeed be less likely to 
have a successful outcome, but both traits may be due to th e fact that she is an especi ally poor candidate who has 
already gone through eight unsuccessf ul prior attempts  and is a wreck.
In other words, more research is needed . If the correlation does tu rn out to be for real, one hopes that the outcome of 
that will be something more constructive than clinicians saying, "And try not to be stressed, because studies have 
shown it cuts down the chances IVF will succeed." It would be kind of nice if pr ogress in this area actually resulted in 
eliminating the stressor that initiated all these co mplexities in the first place, namely, the infertility.
MISCARRIAGE, PSYCHOGENIC ABOR TIONS, AND PRETERM LABOR
The link between stress and spontaneous abortion in humans prompted Hippocrates to caution pregnant women to 
avoid unnecessary emotional disturbances.* Since then, it is a thread that runs through some of our most florid and 
romantic interpretations of the biology of pregnancy. There's Anne Boleyn attributing her miscarriage to the shock of 
seeing Jane Seymour sitting on King Henry's lap, or Rosamond Vincy losing her baby when frightened by a horse in 
Mid-dlemarch. In the 1990 movie Pacific Heights (which took the Reagan-Bush era to its logical extreme, 
encouraging us to root for the poor landlords being menaced by a predatory tenant), the homeowner,
* Miscarriage and abortion are used interchangeably in medical texts and will be so us ed throughout this section. In  everyday clinical usage, 
however, spontaneous termination of a pregnancy when the fetus is close to being viable is more likely to be termed miscarriage  than abortion.
played by Melanie Griffith, has a miscar riage in response to psychological ha rassment by the Machiavellian renter. 
And in the less literary and more mu ndane realm of everyday life, the st ress of a high-demand/low-control job 
increases the risk of miscarriage among women.Page 73 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmStress can cause miscarriages in other animals as well. This  may occur, for example, wh en pregnant animals in the 
wild or in a corral have to  be captured for some reason (a veterinary exam) or are stressed by being transported.
Studies of social hierarchies among animals in the wild have revealed one instance in which stress-induced 
miscarriages often occur. In many soci al species, not all males do equivalent amounts of reproducing. Sometimes the 
group contains only a single male (typically called a "har em male") who does  all the mating; sometimes there are a 
number of males, but only one or a few dominant males re produce.* Suppose the harem male is killed or driven out 
by an intruding male, or a new male migrates into the multi-male group and moves to the top of the dominance 
hierarchy. Typically, the now-dominant male goes about trying to increase his own reproductive success, at the 
expense of the prior male. What does the new guy do? In some species, males will systematically try to kill the infants 
in the group (a pattern called competitive infanticide and observed in a number of species, including lions and some 
monkeys), thus reducing the re productive success of the preced ing male. Following the kil ling, moreover, the female 
ceases to nurse and, as a result, is s oon ovulating a nd ready for mating, to  the convenient advantage of the newly 
resident male. Grim stuff, and a pretty strong demonstration of something well recognized by most evolutionists these 
days; contrary to what Marlin Perkins taught us, animals ra rely behave "for the good of  the species." Instead, they 
typically act for the good of their own genetic legacy and that of thei r close relatives. Among some species—wild 
horses and baboons, for example—the ma le will also systematically harass any pregnant females to the point of 
miscarriage, by the same logic.
This pattern is seen in a particularly subtle way among r odents. A group of females resides with a single harem male. 
If he is driven out by an intruder male who takes up re sidence, within days, female s who have recently become 
pregnant fail to implant the fertilized  egg. Remarkably, this termination of  pregnancy does not require physical 
harassment on the part of the male. It is his new, strange odor that
* Although there is one august (female) prim atologist who refers to single males,  equally aptly, as  "gigolo males."
causes the failed pregnancies by triggering a disruptive rise  in prolactin levels. As pr oof of this, researchers can 
trigger this phenomenon (called the Bruce- Parkes effect) with merely the odor of  a novel male. Why is it adaptive for 
females to terminate pregnancy just because a new male  has arrived on the scene? If the female completes her 
pregnancy, the kids will promptly be killed by this new guy. So, making the best of a bad situation, evolution has 
sculpted this response to at least save the further calorie s that would be devoted to the futile pregnancy—terminate it 
and ovulate a few days later.*
Despite the drama of the Bruce-Parkes  effect, stress-induced miscarriages  are relatively rare among animals, 
particularly among humans. It is not uncommon to decide retrospectively that when something bad happens (such as a 
miscarriage), there was signif icant stress beforehand. To add to the confusion, there is a tendency to attribute 
miscarriages to stressful ev ents occurring a day or so preceding them. In  actuality, most mis carriages involve the 
expelling of a dead fetus, which has typically died quite a wh ile before. If there was a stressful cause, it is likely to 
have come days or even weeks before th e miscarriage, not i mmediately preceding it.
When a stress-induced miscarriage does occur, however, there is a fairly plausible explana tion of how it happens. The 
delivery of blood to the fetus is exquisitely sensitive to blood flow in the mother, and anything that decreases uterine 
blood flow will be disruptive to the fetal blood supply. More over, fetal heart rate closely tracks that of the mother, and 
various psychological stimuli that stimulate or slow down th e heart rate of the mother will cause a similar change a 
minute or so later in the fetus. This has been shown in a number of studies of both humans and primates.
Trouble seems to occur during stress as  a result of repeated powerful activat ion of the sympathetic nervous system, 
causing increased secretion of norepine phrine and epinephrin e. Studies of a large number  of different species show 
that these two hormones will decrease blood flow through the uterus—dramati cally, in some cases. Exposing animals 
to something psychologically stressful (for example, a loud noise in the case of pregnant  sheep, or the entrance of a 
strange person into the room in which a pregnant rhesus monkey is housed) will
* Not to be outdone, females have evolved many strategies of their own to salvag e reproductive success from these battling male s. One is to go into 
a fake heat (in primates, called pseudo-estru s) to sucker the new guy into  thinking he's the father of the offspring she is alr eady carrying. Given the 
appalling lack of knowledge about obst etrics among most male rodents and primates, it usually works. Touche.
cause a similar reduction in blood flow, decreasing the delivery of oxygen (called hypoxia) to the fetus. This is 
certainly not a good thing, and this sort  of prenatal stress returns us to all th e issues of growth in chapter 6. The 
general assumption in the field is that it takes a number of these hypoxic epis odes to cause asphyxiation.
Thus, severe stress can increase the like lihood of miscarriage. Furt hermore, if one is at a late stage in pregnancy, 
stress can increase the risk of preterm birt h, an effect that is prob ably due to elevated glucoc orticoids. Certainly not a 
good thing, given what we saw in the last chapter about the metabolic imprinting consequences of low birth weight.
HOW DETRIMENTAL TO FEMALE REPRODUCTION IS STRESS?Page 74 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAs we have seen, there is an extraordinary array of mech anisms by which reproduction can be disrupted in stressed 
females—fat depletion; secretion of endorphins, prolactin, and glucocorticoids acting on the brain, pituitary, and 
ovaries; lack of progesterone; excessive prolactin acting on the uterus. Moreover, possible blockage of implantation of 
the fertilized egg and changes in blood flow to the fetus generate numerous ways in which stress can make it less 
likely that a pregnancy will be carried to term. With all th ese different mechanisms implicat ed, it seems as if even the 
mildest of stressors would shut down the reproductive system  completely. Surprisingly, however, this is not the case; 
collectively, these mechanisms are not al l that effective. One way of appreciatin g this is to examine the effects of 
chronic low-grade stress on reproduction. Consider traditiona l nonwestern-ized agriculturist s with a fair amount of 
background disease (say seasonal malari a), a high incidence of parasites, and some seasonal malnutrition thrown in—
farmers in Kenya, for example. Before family planning cam e into vogue, the average nu mber of children born to a 
Kenyan woman was about eight. Compare this with the Hutterites, nonmechanized  farmers who live a life similar to 
that of the Amish. Hutterites experience none of the chronic stressors of the Kenyan farm ers, use no contraceptives, 
and have an almost identical reproductiv e rate—an average of nine children per wo man. (It is difficult to make a close 
quantitative comparison of these two populations. The Hutterites, fo r example, delay marriage, decreasing their 
reproductive rate, whereas Kenyan agriculturists traditiona lly do not. Conversely, Kenyan agriculturists typically 
breast-feed for at least
a year, decreasing their reproductive rate, in contrast to the Hutterites, who typically nurse far less. The main point, 
however, is that even with such  different lifestyles, the two repr oductive rates are nearly equal.)
How about reproduction during extreme stress? This has been studied in a literature that always poses problems for 
those discussing it: how to cite a scientific finding withou t crediting the monsters who di d the research? These are the 
studies of women in the Third Reich's concentration camps, conducted by Nazi doctors. (The convention has evolved 
never to cite the names of the doctors, and always to note their criminality.) In a study of the women in the 
Theresienstadt concentration camp, 54  percent of the reproductive-age women were found to have stopped 
menstruating. This is hardly surprising; starvation, slave labor, and unspeakable psycho logical terror are going to 
disrupt reproduction. The point typically made is that, of  the women who stopped menstruating, the majority stopped 
within their first month in the camps—before starvation and labor had pushed fat levels down to the decisive point. 
Many researchers cite this as a demonstration of how disruptive even psychological stress can be to reproduction.
To me, the surprising fact is just th e opposite. Despite starvati on, exhausting labor, and the daily terror that each day 
would be their last, only 54 percen t of those women ceased menstruating. Reproductive mechanisms were still 
working in nearly half the women (although a certain nu mber may have been having anovulatory cycles). And I 
would wager that despite the horrors of their situation, there were still many men who were reproductively intact. That 
reproductive physiology still operated in any individual to any extent, under those circumstances, strikes me as 
extraordinary.
Reproduction represents a vast hierarchy of behavioral and physiological events that differ considerably in subtlety. 
Some steps are basic and massive—the eruption of an egg, the diverting of rivers of blood to a penis. Others are as 
delicate as the line of a poem that awaken s your heart or the whiff of a person's scent that awakens yo ur loins. Not all 
the steps are equally sensitive to stress. The basic machinery of reproduction can be astoundingly resistant to stress in 
a subset of individuals, as evidence fr om the Holocaust shows. Reproduction is  one of the strongest of biological 
reflexes—just ask a salmon leaping upstr eam to spawn, or males of various sp ecies risking life and limb for access to 
females, or any adolescent with that ster oid-crazed look. But when it comes to the pirouettes and filigrees of sexuality, 
stress can wreak havoc with subtleties. That  may not be of enormous consequence to a
starving refugee or a wildebeest in the mi ddle of a drought. But it matters to us, with our culture of multiple orgasms 
and minuscule refractory period s and oceans of libido. And while it is easy to make fun of thos e obsessions of ours, 
those nuances of sexuality, the Cosmos and GQs and other indices of our indulged lives, matter to us. They provide us 
with some of our greatest, if also our most fragile and evanescent, joys.
8
IMMUNITY, STRESS, AND DISEASE
The halls of academe are filling with a newly evolvedPage 75 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmspecies of scientist—the psychoneuroimmunologist—
who makes a living studying the extraordin ary fact that
what goes on in your head can affect how well your
immune system functions. Those two realms were once
thought to be fairly separate—your  immune system kills bacteria,
makes antibodies, hunts for tumors; your brain makes you do the
bunny hop, invents the wheel, has favorite TV shows. Yet the dogma
of the separation of the immune and nervous systems has fallen by the
wayside. The autonomic nervous syst em sends nerves into tissues that
form or store the cells of the imm une system and eventually enter the
circulation. Furthermore,  tissue of the immune system turns out to be
sensitive to (that is, it has receptors  for) all the in teresting hormones
released by the pituitary under the co ntrol of the brain. The result is
that the brain has a vast potential for sticking its nose into the immune
system's business.
The evidence for the brain's in fluence on the immune system goes back  at least a century, dating to the first 
demonstration that if you waved an artificial rose in front of someone who is highly allergic to roses (and who didn't 
know it was a fake), they'd get an allergic response. He re's a charming and more recen t demonstration of the brain 
influencing the immune system: take some professional actors and have them spend a day doing either a depressing 
negative scene, or an uplifting euphoric one. Those in the former state show decreased immune responsiveness, while 
those in the latter manifest an increase. (And where was such a study carried out? In Los Angeles, of course, at 
UCLA.) But the study that probably most solidified the link between
the brain and the immune system used a paradigm called conditioned immunosuppression.
Give an animal a drug that suppress es the immune system. Along with it, provide, a la Pavlov's experiments, a 
"conditioned stimulus"— for example, an artificially flavored  drink, something that the an imal will associate with the 
suppressive drug. A few days later, present the conditioned stimulus by itself—and down goes immune function. In 
1982 the report of an experiment using a variant of this paradigm, carried out by two pioneers in this field, Robert 
Ader and Nicholas Cohen of the Univers ity of Rochester, stunned scientists. Th e two researchers experimented with a 
strain of mice that spontaneously deve lop disease because of overactivity of their immune system s. Normally, the 
disease is controlled by treating the mice with an immunosuppressive drug. Ader and Cohen showed that by using 
their conditioning techniques, they could substitute the c onditioned stimulus for the actual drug—and sufficiently alter 
immunity in these animals to extend their life spans.
Studies such as these convinced scientis ts that there is a strong link betw een the nervous system and the immune 
system. It should come as no surprise th at if the sight of an artificial rose or the taste of an artificially flavored drink 
can alter immune function, then stress can, too. In the first half of this chapter,  I discuss what stress does to immunity 
and how this might be useful during a stressful emergency. In the second half, I'll examine whether sustained stress, 
by way of chronic suppression of immunity, can impair the ability of a body to fight off infectious disease. This is a 
fascinating question, which can be answer ed only with a great deal of caution  and many caveats. Although evidence is 
emerging that stress-induced immunosuppression can indeed increase the risk and severi ty of some diseases, the 
connection is probably relatively weak and its importance often exaggerated.
In order to evaluate the results of this confusing but impor tant field, we need to star t with a primer about how the 
immune system works.
IMMUNE SYSTEM BASICSPage 76 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe primary job of the immune system is to defend the body ag ainst infectious agents such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, 
and parasites. The process is dauntingly complex. For one th ing, the immune system must  tell the difference between 
cells that are normal parts of the body
and cells that are invaders—in immunol ogic jargon, distinguishing between "self" and "non-self." Somehow, the 
immune system can remember what ever y cell in your body looks like, and any ce lls that lack your distinctive cellular 
signature (for example, bact eria) are attacked. Moreover, when your immune system does encounter a novel invader, 
it can even form an immuno logic memory of what the infectious agent looks like, to better prepare for the next 
invasion—a process that is exploited wh en you are vaccinated with a mild versio n of an infectious agent in order to 
prime your immune syst em for a real attack.
Such immune defenses are brought about by a complex array of circulating cells called lymphocytes and monocytes 
(which are collectively known as white blood cells; cyte is a term for cells). There are two classes of lymphocytes: T 
cells and B cells. Both originat e in the bone marrow, but T cells migrate to  mature in the thymus (hence the T), while 
B cells mature in the bone marrow. B cells principally produce antibodies, but th ere are several kinds of T cells (T 
helper and T suppressor cells, cytotoxic killer cells, and so on).
The T and B cells attack infect ious agents in very different ways. T cells bring about cell-mediated immunity (see the 
illustration on page 147). When an infectious agent invades the body, it is recognized by a type of monocyte called a 
macrophage, which presents the foreign particle to a T help er cell. A metaphorical alarm is now sounded, and T cells 
begin to proliferate in response to the invasion. This alarm system ultimately results in the activation and proliferation 
of cytotoxic killer cells, which, as their name implies, att ack and destroy the infectious agent. It is this, the T-cell 
component of the immune system, that is knocked  out by the AIDS virus.
By contrast, B cells cause antibody-me diated immunity (see the illustration on page 148). Once the macrophage-T 
helper cell collaboration has occurred, th e T helper cells then stim ulate B-cell prolif eration. The main task of the B 
cells is to differentiate and generate antibodies, large proteins th at will recognize and bind to  some specific feature of 
the invading infectious agent (typically, a distinctiv e surface protein). This specificity  is critical—the antibody formed 
has a fairly unique shape, which will conform perfectly to th e shape of the distinctive feature of the invader, like the 
fit between a lock and key. In binding to  the specific feature,  antibodies immobilize the inf ectious agent and target it 
for destruction.
There is an additional twist to the immune  system. If different parts of the liver,  for example, need to coordinate some 
activity, they havePage 77 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe cascade of cell-mediated immunity. (1) An infectious agent is encountered by a type of monocyte called a 
macrophage. (2) This stimulates the macrophage to present th e infectious agent to aT helper cell (a type of white 
blood cell) and to release interleukin-1 (IL-1), which stimul ates T helper cell activity. (3) The T helper cell, as a 
result, releases interleukin-2 (IL-2), which triggers T-cell proliferation. (4) This eventually causes another type of 
white blood cell, cytotoxic killer cells, to proliferate and destroy the infectious agent.Page 78 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe cascade of antibody-mediated immu nity. (1) An infectious agent is en countered by a macrophage. (2) This 
encounter stimulates it to present the infectious agent to a T helper cell and to release interleukin-1 (IL-1), which 
stimulates T helper cell activity. (3) The T helper cell then secretes B-cell growth factor, triggering differentiation and 
proliferation of another white blood cell, B cells. (4) The B cells make and release specific antibodies that bind to 
surface proteins on the infectious agent, targeting it for destruction by a large group of circulating proteins known as 
complement.
the advantage of sit ting adjacent to each other. But th e immune system is distributed throughout the ci rculation. In 
order to sound immune alarms throughout this far-flung sy stem, blood-borne chemical me ssengers that communicate 
between different cell types, called cytokines, have evolved. For example, when  macrophages fi rst recognize an 
infectious agent, they release a messenger called interleukin-1. This triggers the T helper cell to release interleukin-2, 
which stimulates T-cell growth (to make life complicated, there are at least half  a dozen additional interleukins with 
more specialized roles). On the antibody front, T cells also secrete B-cell growth  factor. Other classes of messengers, 
such as interferons, activate broad classes of lymphocytes.
The process of the immune system sorting self and non-self usually works well (although truly insidious tropical 
parasites like those that cause schistosomiasis have evolved to evade your immune system by pirating the signature of 
your own cells). Your immune system happily spends its time sorting out self from non-self: red blood cells, part of 
us. Eyebrows, our side. Virus, no good, attack. Muscle cell, good guy....
What if something goes wrong with the immune system's sorting? One obvious kind of error could be that the 
immune system misses an infectious invader; clearly, bad ne ws. Equally bad is the sort of error in which the immune 
system decides something is a dangerous invader that really isn't. In one version of this, some perfectly innocuous 
compound in the world around you triggers an alarm reacti on. Maybe it is something th at you normally ingest, like 
peanuts or shellfish, or something airborne and innocuou s, like pollen. But your imm une system has mistakenly 
decided that this is not only foreign but dangerous, and kicks into gear. And this is an allergy.Page 79 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmIn the second version of the immune system overreacting, a normal part of your own body is mistaken for an 
infectious agent and is attack ed. When the immune system erroneously attack s a normal part of th e body, a variety of 
horrendous "autoimmune" diseases may result. In multiple sclerosis, for example, part  of your nervous system is 
attacked; in juvenile diabetes, it's the cells in the pancreas that normall y secrete insulin. As we'l l see shortly, stress has 
some rather confusing eff ects on autoimmune diseases.
So far in this overview of the immune system , we've been concentrating on something called acquired immunity. 
Suppose you're exposed to some novel, dangerous pathogen, pathogen X, for the first time. Acquired immunity has 
three features. First, you acquire the ability to target pathogen X sp ecifically, with antibodies and cell-mediated 
immunity that specifically recognize that pathogen. Th is really works
to your advantage—a bullet with pathogen X's name writte n on it. Second, it takes some time to build up that 
immunity when you are first exposed to pathogen X—this involves finding which antibody has the best fit and 
generating a zillion copies of it. Finally, while you will now be geared up to specifically  go after pathogen X for a 
long time to come once that specific defense is on line, repeated exposu re to pathogen X will boost those targeted 
defenses even more.
Such acquired immunity is a pretty fancy invention, and it is found only in vertebrates. Bu t we also contain a simpler, 
more ancient branch of the immune system, one sh ared with species as di stant as insects, called innate immunity. In 
this realm, you don't bother with acquiring the means to ta rget pathogen X specifically with antibodies that will be 
different from those that would target, say, pathogen Y. Inst ead, the second any sort of path ogen hits your system, this 
nonspecific immune response swings into action.
This generalized immune response tends to occur at the beachhead where a pathogen gets its first foothold, like your 
skin, or moist mucosal tissue, like in your mouth or nose. As a first st ep, your saliva contains a cl ass of antibodies that 
generically attack any sort of  microbe that it encounters, in stead of acquiring a means of  targeting specific invaders. 
These antibodies are secreted and coat your mucosal surfaces like an antiseptic paint. In addition,  at the site of 
infection, capillaries loosen up, allowing cells of the innate immune response to slip out of the circulation to infiltrate 
the immediate area of infect ion. These cells include macrophages, neutrophils, and natural killer cells, which then 
attack the microbe. The loosen ing of the capillaries also allows fluid containing proteins that can fight the invasive 
microbes to flow in from the circulation. And what happens as a result of that? The protei ns fight the microbe, but the 
fluid also makes the area swell up, causing edema. This is your innate immune system leaping into action, causing 
inflammation.*
This gives us a broad overview of immune function. Time to see what stress does to immunity. Naturally, as it turns 
out, a lot more complicated thin gs than used to be suspected.
* As just mentioned, the innate immune re sponse involves proteins inf iltrating into the ar ea of injury. Among those proteins, f ighting those 
microbes, is one we heard about in chap ter 3 called "C-reactive protein." You will recall how gunk like cholesterol forms ather osclerotic plaques 
only at places where your blood vessels are injured. Thus, a measure of injury and in flammation at your bl ood vessels is a good  predictor of 
atherosclerotic risk. C-reactive protein, as we learned,  is the most reliable indicator of such inflammation.
Photomicrograph of a natural killer T cell attacking a tumor cell.
HOW DOES STRESS
INHIBIT IMMUNE FUNCTION?Page 80 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmIt's been almost sixty years since Selye discovered the first evidence of stress-induced immunos uppression, noting that 
immune tissues like the thymus gland atrophied among rats subjected to nonsp ecific unpleasantness.  Scientists have 
learned more about the subtleties of the immune system since then, and it turns out that a period of stress will disrupt a 
wide variety of immune functions.
Stress will suppress the formation of new lymphocytes and their release into the circul ation, and shorten the time 
preexisting lymphocytes stay in the circulation. It will in hibit the manufacturing of new antibodies in response to an 
infectious agent, and disrupt communication among lymphocyt es through the release of relevant messengers. And it 
will inhibit the innate immune response, suppressing in flammation. All sorts of stressors do this—physical, 
psychological, in primates, rats, birds, even in fish. And, of course, in humans, too.
The best-documented way in which such immune suppression  occurs is via glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids, for 
example, can cause shrinking of th e thymus gland; this is such a reliable ef fect that in olden days (circa 1960), before 
it was possible to measure directly the amount of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream, one indirect way of doing so was 
to see how much the thymus gland in an  animal had shrunk. The smaller the thymus, the more glucocorticoids in the 
circulation. Glucocorticoids halt the formation of new lymphocytes in
the thymus, and most of the thymic tissue is made up of these new cells, ready to be s ecreted into the bloodstream. 
Because glucocorticoids inhibit the release of messengers like interleukins and interferons, they also make circulating 
lymphocytes less responsive to an inf ectious alarm. Glucocorticoids, moreover, cause lymphocytes to be yanked out 
of the circulation and stuck back in storage in immune tissu es. Most of these glucocorticoi d effects are against T cells, 
rather than B cells, meaning that cell- mediated immunity is more disrupted than antibody-mediated immunity. And 
most impressively, glucocorticoids can actually kill lymphocytes . This taps into one of the hottest topics in medicine, 
which is the field of "programmed cell d eath."* Cells are programmed to commit suicide sometimes. For example, if a 
cell begins to become cancerous, there is a suicide pathway that gets activated to kill the cell before it starts dividing 
out of control; a few types of cancers in volve the failure of the pr ogrammed cell death to o ccur. It turns out that 
glucocorticoids can trigger those suicide pathways into action in lymphocytes, throu gh a variety of mechanisms.
Sympathetic nervous system hormones, beta-endorphin, and CRH within the brain also play a role in suppressing 
immunity during stress. The precise mech anisms by which this happens are nowh ere near as well understood as with 
glucocorticoid-induced immune suppression, and these ot her hormones have traditionally been viewed as less 
important than the glucocorticoid part of the story. Howeve r, a number of experiments have shown that stressors can 
suppress immunity independently of glucocorticoid secretion, strongly implicating these other routes.
WHY IS IMMUNITY SUPPRESSED DURING STRESS?
Figuring out exactly how glucocorticoids and the other stre ss hormones suppress immunity is a very hot topic these 
days in cell and molecular biology, especially the part abou t killing lymphocytes. But amid all this excitement about 
cutting-edge science, it would be
* Another trendy term  in this field is apoptosis, which is derived from Latin for so mething like "falling off" (as in the falling off of leaves in the 
fall, an example of programmed death). There are great debates as  to whether apoptosis equals programmed cell death or is just a subtype of it (I 
subscribe to the latter view), as well as, amazingly, whether you pronounce the second p in the word (I do, a pronuncia tion that is considered to 
have a rough-hewn man-in-the -street plebian air to it).
reasonable to begin to wonder why you should want your immune system suppressed during stress. In chapter 1, I 
offered an explanation for this; now th at the process of stress-induced immunosuppression has been explained in a 
little more detail, it should be obvious that my early explanation makes no sense. I suggested that during stress it is 
logical for the body to shut down long-term building projects in order to divert energy for more immediate needs—
this inhibition includes the immune system, which, while fabulous at spotting a tumor that will kill you in six months 
or making antibodies that will help you in a week, is not vital in the next few moments'  emergency. That explanation 
would make sense only if stress froze the immune system right where it was—no more immune expenditures until the 
emergency is finished. However, that is not what happens.  Instead, stress causes the activ e expenditure of  energy in 
order to disassemble the preexisting immune system—ti ssues are shrunk, cells are destroyed. This cannot be 
explained by a mere halt to expenditures—you're paying, energetically, to take apart th e immune system. So out goes 
this extension of the long-term  versus short-term theory.
Why should evolution set us up to do something as appare ntly stupid as disassembling our immune system during 
stress? Maybe there isn't a good reason. This actually isn't as crazy of a respon se as you might think. Not everything 
in the body has to have an explanation in terms of evolutionary adaptiven ess. Maybe stress-induced 
immunosuppression is simply a by-product of something el se that is adaptive; it ju st came along for the ride.
This is probably not the case. During infections, the immune  system releases the chemi cal messenger interleukin-1, 
which among other activities stimulates the hypothalamus to release CRH. As no ted in chapter 2, CRH stimulates the 
pituitary to release ACTH, which then causes adrenal release of glucocorticoid s. These in turn suppress the immune 
system. In other words, under some circum stances, the immune system will ask th e body to secrete ho rmones that will Page 81 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmultimately suppress the immune system. For whatever reason the immunosupp ression occurs, the immune system 
sometimes encourages it. It is probably not just an accident.*
* My tiny footnote in science: I was part of the group that discovered the fact that interleukin-1 s timulates CRH release. Or at least I thought I was. 
It was in the mid-1980s. The idea made so me sense, and the lab I was in jumped on it under my prompting. We worked like maniacs , and at two 
o'clock one morning I had one of those moments of euphoria that sc ientists die for: looking at th e printout from one of the mac hines and realizing, 
"Aha, I was right, it does work that way—interleukin-1 released CRH ." We wrote up the findings, th ey were accepted by the prest igious journal 
Science, everyone
Various ideas have floated around over the years to explain why you actively disassemble immunity during stress with 
the willing cooperation of the immune system. Some seemed fairly plausible until people learned a bit more about 
immunity and could rule them out. Others were quite nutty , and I happily advocated a few of these in the first edition 
of this book. But in the last decade, an answer ha s emerged, and it really tu rns this field on its head.
SURPRISE
It turns out that during the first few minutes (say, up to about thirty) after the onset of a stressor, you don't uniformly 
suppress immunity—you enhance many aspects of it (phase A on the accomp anying graph). This is shown with all 
realms of immunity, but in particular for innate immunity . This makes sense—it may be helpful to activate parts of 
your immune system that are going to make some swell anti bodies for you over the next few weeks, but it makes even 
more sense to immediately activate part s of the immune system that are going to help you out right now. More 
immune cells are rushed into the circula tion and, in the injured nervous system, more inflammatory cells infiltrate the 
site of injury. Moreover, circulating ly mphocytes are better at releasing and responding to those immune messengers. 
And more of those generic antibodies of the innate immune system are released into your saliva. This boosting of 
immunity doesn't occur only after some in fectious challenge. Physical stressors, psychological stressors, all appear to 
cause an early stage of immune act ivation. Even more surprisingly, those immunosuppressive villains, 
glucocorticoids, appear to play a major role in this (along with the sympathetic nervous system).
So, with the onset of all sorts of stre ssors, your immune defenses are enhan ced. And now we are ready for our usual 
other side of the two-edged sword, when the stress goes on longer. By the one-hour mark, more sustained 
glucocorticoid and sy mpathetic activation
was very excited, I called my parents, and so on. Paper gets published, and right next to it was an identical study from a group in Switzerland, sent 
in to the journal the same exact week. So I became a discoverer of this obscure fact. (To hark back to a theme of chapter 2, if you are a mature, 
confident individual—which unfortunately I am only rarely—you take  pleasure in this so rt of thing: two labs, working independen tly on opposite 
sides of the globe, come up with the same novel observa tion. It must be true. Science lurches forward an inch.)
Stress turns out to transiently stimulate the immune system.
begins to have the opposite effect, namely, suppressing immunity. If the stressor ends around then, what have you 
accomplished with that immunosuppression? Bringing imm une function back to where it started, back to baseline 
(phase B). It is only with major stressors of longer duration,  or with really major exposure  to glucocorticoids, that the 
immune system does not just return to baseline, but plummets into a range that really does qualify as 
immunosuppressing (phase C). For most things that you can measure in the immune system, sustained major stressors 
drive the numbers down to 40 to 70 percent below baseline.
The idea of temporarily perking up your immune system with the onset of a stressor makes a fair amount of sense 
(certainly at least as much as some of the convoluted theories as to why su ppressing it makes sense). As does the 
notion that what goes up must come down. And as does the frequent theme of this book, namely, that if you have a 
stressor that goes on for too long, an adaptive decline back to baseline can overshoot and you get into trouble.Page 82 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhy did it take people so long to figure  this out? Probably for two reasons. Fi rst, because many of  the techniques for 
measuring what's happening in the immune system have on ly recently become sensitiv e enough to pick up small, 
rapid differences, the thing needed to catch phase A, that fast immunostimulatory blip at the beginning of a stressor. 
Thus, for decades, people tho ught they were studying the immune respon se to stress, whereas they were actually 
studying the recovery of the immune response to stress. As a second r eason, most scientists in this field study major, 
prolonged stressors, or administer major
amounts of glucocorticoids for prolonged periods. This re presents a reasonable bias in how experiments are done—
start with a sledgehammer of an experimental manipulation. If nothing happens, pick a new field to study. If 
something does happen and it's been replicated enough times that you're confident about it, only then begin to think 
about more subtle elaborations. So in th e early years, people were only studying the sorts of stressors or patterns of 
glucocorticoid exposure that pushed into phase C, and only later got around to the subtler circumstances that would 
reveal phase B.
This reorientation of the field represents a triumph for Allan Munck of Dartmouth University, one of the godfathers of 
the field, who predicted most of these new findings in the mid-1980s. He also predicted what turns out to be the 
answer to a question that pops up after a while. Why would you want to bring immune function back down to the pre-
stress level (phase B in the diagram)? Why not just let it remain at the enhanced, improved level achieved in the first 
thirty minutes and get the benefits of an activated immune system all the ti me? Metaphorically, why not have your 
military that defends you always on maximal alert? For on e thing, it costs too much. And, even more important, a 
system that's always on maximal, hair-t rigger alert is more likely to get carried  away at some point and shoot one of 
your own guys in a friendly fire accident. And that's what can happen with immune systems that are chronically 
activated—they begin to mistake part of you for being something invasive, and you've got yourself an autoimmune 
disease.
Such reasoning led Munck to predict that if you fail to have  phase B, if you don't coast that activated immune system 
back down to baseline, you're more at risk for an autoimmune disease. This id ea has been verified in at least three 
realms. First, artificially lock glucocor ticoid levels in the low basal range in rats and then stress them. This produces 
animals that have phase A (mostly mediated  by epinephrine), but there isn't the rise in glucocorticoids to fully pull off 
phase B. The rats are now more at risk  for autoimmune disease. Second, doctors have to occasionally remove one of 
the two adrenal glands (the source of glucocorticoids) from a patient, typi cally because of a tumor. Immediately 
afterward, circulating glucocorticoid levels are halved for a period, until the remaining adrenal bulks up enough to 
take on the job of two. During that period of low glucocorticoid levels, people are more likely than normal to flare up 
with some autoimmune or in flammatory disease—there's not enough glucoc orticoids around to pu ll off phase B when 
something stressful occurs. Finally, if you look at strains of rats or, weirdly, chickens, that spontaneously develop 
autoimmune diseases, they all turn  out to have something wrong with
A schematic representation of how a failure to inhibit immune function during stress can bias you toward autoimmune 
disease.
the glucocorticoid system so that th ey have lower than normal levels of the hormone, or have immune and 
inflammatory cells that are less responsive than normal  to glucocorticoids. Same for humans with autoimmune 
diseases like rheumatoid arthritis.Page 83 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThus, early on in the stress-response, the immune system is being activated, rather than in hibited, and a big thing that 
the stress-response does is make sure that immu ne activation doesn't spiral into autoimmunity.
So that has forced some revisionism in this field. But just to add to this, once stress has gone on long enough to begin 
to suppress immunity, some of what have classically been  taken to be aspects of immune suppression are actually 
more subtle versions of immune enhancement.
This is seen in two ways. Give someone massive amounts of glucocorticoids, or a huge stressor that has gone on for 
many hours, and the hormones will be killing lymphocytes indiscriminately, just mowing them down. Have a subtle 
rise in glucocorticoid levels for a short time (like what is going on at the start of phase B), and the hormones kill only 
a particular subset of lymphocytes—older ones, ones that don't work as well. Glucocorti coids, at that stage, are 
helping to sculpt the immune response, getting rid of lymphocytes that  aren't ideal for the immediate emergency. So 
that indirectly counts as a version of immune enhancement.
A second subtlety reflects reinterpretation of something pe ople have known since the dawn of humans (or at least 
during Selye's prime). As
noted, glucocorticoids not only kill lymphocytes, but also  yank some remaining lymphocytes out of the circulation. 
Firdhaus Dhabhar of Ohio State University asked, Where do those immune cells go when they are pulled out of the 
circulation? The assumption in the field had always been that they all go into immune storage ti ssues (like the thymus 
gland)—they're taken out of action, so that they aren't much use to you. But Dhabhar's work shows that they don't all 
get mothballed. Instead, glucocorticoids and epinephrine are divertin g many of those lymphocytes to the specific site 
of infection, such as the sk in. The immune cells aren't be ing deactivated—they're being tr ansferred to the front lines. 
And a consequence of this is  that wounds heal faster.
Thus, early on during exposure to a stressor, glucocorticoids and other stress-responsive hormones transiently activate 
the immune system, enhancing immune defenses, sharpening them, redistributing immune cells to the scenes of 
infectious battle. Because of the dangers of the systems overshooting into autoimmunity, more prolonged 
glucocorticoid exposure begins to reve rse these effects, bringing the syst em back to baseline. And during the 
pathological scenario of truly major, sustained stressors, immunity is suppressed below baseline.
These new findings help to explain one of the persistent pa radoxes in this field. It co ncerns autoimmune diseases.
Two facts about autoimmunity:
1.  Insofar as autoimmune diseases involve overactivation of  the immune system (to the po int of considering a healthy 
constituent of your body to actually be something invasive), the most time-honored treatment  for such diseases is to 
put people "on steroids"—to give them massive amounts of glucocorticoids. The logic here is obvious: by 
dramatically suppressing the im mune system it can no longer  attack your pancreas or nerv ous system, or whatever is 
the inappropriate target of its misplaced zeal (and, as an obvious side effect to this approach, your  immune system will 
also not be very effective at defending you against real pathogens). Thus, administration of large amounts of these 
stress hormones makes autoimmune diseases less damagi ng. Moreover, prolonged ma jor stressors decrease the 
symptoms of autoimmune diseases in lab rats.
2.  At the same time, it appears that stress can worsen autoimmune diseases. Stress is am ong the most reliable, if not 
the most reliable, factor to worsen su ch diseases. This has often been repo rted anecdo-tally by patients, and is 
typically roundly ignored by clinicians who know that stress hormones help reduce autoimmunity, not worsen
it. But some objective studies also support this view for au toimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, Grave's disease, ul cerative colitis, inflammatory bo wel disease, and asthma. Ther e have been only a handful 
of such reports, and they su ffer from the weakness of relying on patient-r eported retrospective data, rather than on 
prospective data. Nevertheless, their findings are relatively co nsistent—there is a subset of patients whose initial onset 
of an autoimmune disease and, to an even greater extent, their intermittent flare-ups of bad symptoms are yoked to 
stress. Moreover, there is, by now, a pretty hefty literature  showing that stress can wors en autoimmunity in animal 
models of these diseases.
So, do glucocorticoids and stress worsen or lessen the symp toms of autoimmunity? The gr aph below gives an answer 
that wasn't clear in earlier years. We'v e now seen two scenarios that increase the risk of autoimmune disease. First, it 
seems as if numerous transient stressors  (that is, lots of phases A and B) increase the risk of autoimmunity—for some 
reason, repeated ups and downs ratchet the system upward, biasing it toward autoimmunity. Second , while it seems 
not to be great to have lots of instances of phase A followed by phase B, having phase A not followed by phase B 
increases the risk of autoimmunity as well. If you don't ha ve an adequate phase B, that pushes the immune system 
spiral upward into autoimmunity (back to diagram on page 157).Page 84 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAs we would now expect, if you instead have massive prolonged stressors, or are administered big hefty doses of 
glucocorticoids, you put the system in phase C—dramatic  immune suppression, which decreases the symptoms of 
autoimmunity. Supporting this summary
A schematic representation of how repeated stre ss increases the risk of autoimmune disease.
is the finding that while acute stress puts rats more at ri sk for a model of multiple scle rosis, chronic stress suppresses 
the symptoms of that auto immune disease. The system apparently did not evolve for dealing with numerous 
repetitions of coordinating the various on-and-off switches, and ultimately something uncoordinated occurs, 
increasing the risk that the system becomes autoimmune.
CHRONIC STRESS AND DISEASE RISK
A repeated theme in this book is how some physiological response to your average, run-of-the-mill mammalian 
stressor, if too long or too frequent, gets you into troubl e. The ability of major stressors to suppress immunity below 
baseline certainly seems like a candidate for this categ ory. How damaging is stress-induced immunosuppression when 
it actually occurs? As the AIDS virus has taught us, if you suppress the immune system su fficiently, a thirty-year-old 
will fester with cancers and pneu monias that doctors used to see once in an  elderly patient during  a fifty-year career. 
But can chronic stress suppress the immune  system to the point of making you more susceptible to diseases you 
wouldn't otherwise get? Once you have a disease, are you now less capable of fighting it off?
Evidence pouring in from many quarters suggests that stress may indeed impair our immune systems and increase the 
risk of illness. But despite these striking findings, it re mains far from clear just how much chronic stress makes you 
more vulnerable to diseases that wo uld normally be fought off by the immune system. In order to appreciate the 
current disarray of the research, let us try to break down the findings into their component parts.
Essentially, all these studies show a link between something that increases or decreases stress and some disease or 
mortality outcome. The approach of many psychoneuroimmun ologists is based on the assumption that this link is 
established through the following steps:
1.  The individuals in question have been stressed,
2.  causing them to turn on the stress-response (the secretion of glucocorticoids, epinephrine, and so on).3.  The duration and magnitude of the stress-response in these individuals is big enough to suppress immune function,
4. which increases the odds of these individuals getting some  infectious disease, and impa irs their ability to defend 
themselves against that disease once they have it.
Thus, suppose you see that a certain im mune-related disease is more common in circumst ances of stress. You now 
have to ask two critical questions. First, can you show that steps 1 to  4 occurred in those stre ssed individuals with that 
disease? Second, is there some altern ative route that explains starting w ith stress and getting to the disease?
Let's begin by analyzing those four separate steps, in order to see how tough it is to demonstrate that all four have 
occurred.
Step 1, "The individuals in question have been stressed." In studies of nonhuman animals, the general consensus is 
that with enough stress, you are going to get to steps 2 through 4. But a problem in extrapolating to humans is that the 
experimental stressors used in animal st udies are usually more awfu l than what we typically experience. Not only that, Page 85 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmbut we differ tremendously among ourselves as to what  we experience as truly st ressful—the whole realm of 
individual differences that will be the focu s of the last chapter of this book. Therefore, if you try to study the effects of 
stressors on people's immune systems, you must wrestle with the problem of whether these things actually seem 
stressful to a given individual or not. What that winds up meaning is that step 1 is proba bly satisfied in stress/immune-
related disease studies that involve even ts that most everyone wo uld consider pretty awful— the death of a loved one, 
divorce, financially threatening unemployment. But if the external reality is one that a lot of people would not 
consider to be stressful, you can't auto matically accept that you're at step 1.
There is another problem with step 1: it's often not clear whether humans are really exposed to the stressors to which 
they claim they're exposed. We tend to be notoriously bad reporters of what goes on in our lives. An imaginary 
experiment: take one hundred lucky people and slip them a drug that will give  them bad stomachaches for a few days. 
Then send them to a doctor secretly participating in this experiment, who tells them that they have developed stomach 
ulcers. The doctor asks innocently, "Have things been par ticularly stressful for you recen tly?" Perhaps ninety of those 
subjects will come up with something or other putatively stressful to which they will now attribute the ulcer. In 
retrospective studies, people confronted with an illness ar e very likely to decide there were stressful events going on.
When you rely heavily on retrospective studies with humans, you are likely to get a falsely strong link between stress 
and disease; and the trouble is, most studies in this field ar e retrospective (a problem that  popped up in the chapter on 
digestive disorders as well). The expensive and lengt hy prospective studies are only recently becoming more 
common—pick a bunch of healthy people and follow them for decades to come, recordin g as an objective outsider 
when they are being exposed to stre ssors and whether they become sick.
We move to the next step: from the stressor to the stress-response (step 1 to step 2). Again, if you give an organism a 
massive stressor, it will reliably have a strong stress-response.  With more subtle stressors, we have more subtle stress-
responses.
The same thing holds for the move from step 2 to step  3. In experimental animal  studies, large amounts of 
glucocorticoids will cause the immune system to hit the fl oor. The same occurs if a human has a tumor that causes 
massive amounts of glucocorticoids to be secreted (Cushing 's syndrome), or if a person is taking huge doses of 
synthetic glucocorticoids to control some other disease. But as we now know, the moderate rises in glucocorticoid 
levels seen in response to many more typical stressor s stimulate the immune system , rather than suppress it. 
Moreover, in a few types of cancers elevat ed levels of glucocorticoids should be protective. As we saw in the last 
chapter, very high levels of glucocorticoids will suppress le vels of estrogens in females and testosterone in males, and 
certain types of cancers are stimulated by these hormones (most notably "estrogen-sensitive" forms of breast cancer 
and "androgen-sensitive" prostate cancers). In these cases, lo ts of stress equals lots of glucocorticoids equals less 
estrogen or testosterone equals slower tumor growth.
Moving from step 3 to step 4, how much  does a change in immune profile alter patterns of disease? The odd thing is 
that immunologists are not sure about this. If your immune system is massively suppressed, you are more likely to get 
sick, no doubt about that. People taking high doses of glucocorticoids as medication, who are thus highly 
immunocompromised, are vu lnerable to all sorts of inf ectious diseases, as are people  with Cushing's syndrome. Or 
AIDS.
The more subtle fluctuations in immunity are less clear in their implications, however. Few immunologists would be 
likely to assert that "for every tiny d ecrease in some measure of immune functio n, there is a tiny increase in disease 
risk." Their hesitancy is because the relationship between immune competence and disease may be nonlinear. In other 
words, once you pass a certain threshold of immunosuppression, you are up the creek without a paddle; but before 
that,
immune fluctuations may not really matter much. The immu ne system is so complex th at being able to measure a 
change in one little piece of it in response to stress may mean nothing about the system  as a whole. Thus, the link 
between relatively minor immune fluctuation and patterns of disease in humans winds up being relatively weak.
There is another reason why it may be difficult to generalize from findings in the laboratory to the real world. In the 
laboratory, you might be studying the effects of steps 1, 2,  and 3 on disease outcome 4. It is inconvenient for most 
scientists to manipulate a rat's levels of stress, glucocortic oids, or immunity and then wait for the rest of the rat's 
lifetime to see if it is more likely to become ill than is  a control rat. That's slow a nd expensive. Typically, instead, 
scientists study induced diseases. Manipulate  step 1, 2, or 3 in a rat that has b een exposed to a certa in virus; then see 
what happens. When you do that, you get information about steps 1 through 3 that have to do with step 4 when 
dealing with severe, artificially induced disease challenges. But it should be obvio us that an approach like this misses 
the point that we don't get sick because some scientist deli berately exposes us to diseas e. Instead, we spend our lives 
passing through a world filled with scatteredPage 86 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmcarcinogenic substances, occasional epid emics, someone sneezing from across th e room. Relatively few experimental 
animal studies have looked at spontaneo us diseases, rather than induced ones.
These are a lot of caveats. Let's consider  some areas where there are links between  stress and diseases associated with 
immune dysfunction. This will let us evaluate to what ex tent these links are a function of progressing from steps 1 
through 4, what we w ill call the "Psy-choneur oimmune Route," which lin ks stress and disease. In each case, we'll 
consider if there is an alte rnative sequence, what we'll loosely call the "Lifestyle Route," which can link stress and 
immune-related disease while bypas sing the sequence of  steps 1 to 4.
TESTING THE STRESS-DISEASE LINK Social Support and Social Isolation
What the data show: the fewer social relationships a person has, the shorter his or her life expectancy, and the worse 
the impact of various infectio us diseases. Relationships that are medically protective can take the form of marriage, 
contact with friends and extended family , church membership, or other group affi liations. This is a fairly consistent 
pattern that cuts across a lot of diff erent settings. Moreover, these general findings are based on some careful 
prospective studies and are seen  in both sexes and in different races, in American and European populations living in 
both urban and rural areas. Most important, this effect is bi g. The impact of social rela tionships on life expectancy 
appears to be at least as large as th at of variables such as cigarette smoking, hypertension, obesity, and level of 
physical activity. For the same illness, people with the fe west social connections have approximately two-and-a-half 
times as much chance of dying as those with the most connect ions, after controlling for such  variables as age, gender, 
and health status.
Very exciting. And what might explain this relationship? Maybe it's through the Psychoneuroimmune Route of steps 1 
to 4, which would run something like: socially isolated peopl e are more stressed for lack of social outlets and support 
(step 1); this leads to chronic activation of stress-responses (step 2); leading to immune suppression (step 3); and more 
infectious diseases (step 4).
Let's see what support there is for each of  these steps. First, just because some one is socially isolated doesn't mean 
they are stressed by
it—there are lots of hermits who would be happy to pass on yet another crowded Twister party. Social isolation as a 
stressor is a subjective assessm ent. In many of these studies, however, the subjects who fit the bill as socially isolated 
rate themselves as lonely, certainly a negative emotion. So we can check off step 1. On to step 2—do these people 
have chronically overactive stress-responses? We have little evidence for or against that.
How about step 3—is social isolation associated with damping down some aspect of immune function? There's a lot 
of evidence for that: lonelier, more soci ally isolated individuals having less of  an antibody response to a vaccine in Page 87 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmone study; in another study of people with AIDS, having a faster decline in a key category of lymphocytes; in another, 
of women with breast cancer, having  less natural killer cell activity.
Then on to step 4—can you actually show that that degr ee of immune suppression play ed a role in the disease 
occurring? The facts are relatively weak. Some studies show social is olation and step 3; others show isolation and step 
4, but few show both and also explicitly show that the magnitude of step 3 has something to do with the transition to 
step 4.
Still, there is relatively good evidence for this pathway be ing relevant. What about the Lifestyle Route? What if the 
problem is that socially isolated people  lack that special someone to remind them to take their daily medication? It is 
known that isolated people are less likely to comply with a medical regime. What if they're more likely to subsist on 
reheated fast food instead of something nutritious? Or more likely to indulge in some foolish risk-taking behavior, like 
smoking, because there's no one to tr y to convince them to stop ? Many lifestyle patterns c ould link social isolation 
with more infectious disease,  bypassing this sequence of steps. Or what  if the causality is reversed— what if the 
linkage occurs because sickly people are less likely to  be able to maintain st able social relationships?
Numerous studies have controlled for these lifestyle risk  factors like smoking, diet, or medication compliance and 
have shown that the isolation/poor health outcome relatio nship is still there. Moreover, critically, you can show the 
same in nonhuman primates, who don't confound their health  with Big Macs, alcohol, a nd smoking. Infect monkeys 
with SIV (the simian equivalent of HIV) and more socially isolated animals had higher glucocorticoid levels, fewer 
antibodies against the virus, more virus in their system, and a greater mo rtality rate—in other words, steps 1 to 4.
Overall, I'd say a pretty good case can be made that social isolation can impact h ealth through the effects of stress on 
immunity. But the case isn't airtight.
Bereavement
Bereavement, an extreme version of soci al isolation, is, of course, the loss of a loved one. An extensive literature 
shows that while bereavement often coinci des with depression, it is distinct fr om it. A common belief is that the one 
left behind—the grieving spouse, the bereft parent, even the masterless pet—now pines aw ay to an early death. A 
number of studies suggest that bereavement does indeed increas e the risk of dying, although  the effect is not all that 
strong. This is probably because  the risk occurs only in a subset of grieve rs, amid those people who have an additional 
physiological or psychological risk factor coupled with the bereavement. In one careful prospective study, the parents 
of all the Israeli soldiers who died in the Lebanese war we re followed for ten years afterw ard. Loss of a child did not 
affect mortality rates in the population of grieving parents in general. However, significantly higher mortality rates 
occurred among parents who were already widowed or divor ced. In other words, this st ressor is associated with 
increased mortality in the subset of parents with the added risk factor of  minimal social support.
Thus, we are turfed back to the subj ect of social isolation. Again, the evidence for the Psyc honeuroimmune Route 
occurring is decent but, again,  there are many potential Lifestyle Routes—g rieving people are un likely to be eating, 
sleeping, exercising in a healthy manner. Sometimes the confound is more subtle. People tend to marry people who 
are ethnically and genetically quite similar to themselves. In trinsic in this trend toward "homogamy" is a tendency of 
married couples to have higher-than-random chances of sharing environmental risk factors (as well as to 
disproportionately share disease-related genes, making this  component of the Lifestyle Route not really related to 
lifestyle). This makes it more likely that they will get sick around the same time. None theless, amid those confounds, 
the Psychoneuroimmune Route's steps 1 to 4 are probably re levant to the increased mort ality rates among bereaved 
individuals lackin g social support.
The Common Cold
Everybody knows that being stressed increases your chances of getting a cold. Just think back to being run down, 
frazzled, and sleep-deprived
during final exams, and, sure enough, there's that cough and runny nose. Examine the r ecords at univer sity health 
services and you'll see the sa me thing—students succumbing to colds left and right around exam period. Many of us 
continue to see the same pattern decades later—burn the candle at both ends for a few days and, suddenly, there's that 
scratchy throat.
Psychoneuroimmune Route steps 1 to 4 seem quite plausible. Some of the studies involve some pretty hefty external 
events that most people would consider stressful, like financially disastrous unemployment (step 1). But few have 
looked at the magnitude of the stress-response (step 2). Chan ges in relevant immune measures have been documented, 
however—for example, in studies in wh ich stress increases the risk of a cold , those same individuals are shown to 
have less of the cold-fighting class of antibodies that are secreted in your saliva and nasal passageways (steps 3 and 
4).Page 88 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmBut we have to consider some possible Lifestyle Route confounds. Maybe the disruptive effects of stress on memory 
(stay tuned for chapter 10) cause us to forget to button up our overcoats. Or maybe when we are under stress due to 
social isolation, we are more willin g to consort with people who sneeze recklessly without covering their faces.
Okay, maybe those aren't confounds you have to worry about too much. But stress changes lifestyle and different 
lifestyles mean differing degrees of exposure to th e viruses that cause colds.
That possibility has been controlled fo r in a celebrated series of studies. In  one version, some cheerfully compliant 
volunteers were housed under conditions where some major life style confounds were controlled for. They then filled 
out questionnaires regarding how stressed they were. Subjects were then spritzed up their noses with equal amounts of 
rhinovirus, the bug that causes the comm on cold. Note that everyone was exposed to the same amount of pathogen. 
And the results? (Fanfare.) More stress equaled about three times the likelihood of succumbing to a cold after being 
exposed to the virus. Prolonged stressors more than a mont h long that were social in nature provided the greatest 
risk.* Moreover, the same thing works in
* These studies came out of the famed Commo n Cold Unit of the Medical Research Council in Salisbury, England, which recruited v olunteers for 
their frequent two-week experiments about va rious aspects of coming down with and rec overing from the common cold. Apparently q uite an 
experience: all expenses covered plus a small salary, many r ecreational activities in the peace ful Salisbury countryside, daily  blowing of noses into 
collection tubs for the staff, qu estionnaires to fill out, and being spritzed up the nose with either pl acebo or a cold-causing  virus. One in three 
chance, on average, of  getting a cold while there. People would co mpete for slots as volunteers; couples have
(continued)
laboratory mice and nonhuman primates—spr itz them with rhino-virus, and it is the stressed, socially subordinate 
animals who get their species' equivalent of the sniffles.
Collectively, it seems pretty convincing that stress makes the common cold more common at least partially along the 
Psychoneuro-immune Route.
AIDS
Given that AIDS is a disease of profound immunosuppressi on, and that major stressors suppress the immune system, 
can stress increase the likelihood that someone who is HIV positive develops AIDS? And once AIDS is established, 
can stress worsen its course?
These questions have been aired since the AIDS epidemic began. Since the last edition of this book, the triple 
combination antiretroviral ther apy has turned AIDS from a fatal disease to an often manageable chronic one, making 
these questions even  more relevant.*
There is some good indirect evidence to  think that stress can alter the course of AIDS. Suppose you grow human 
lymphocytes in a petri dish and expose th em to HIV. If you expose the cells to  glucocorticoids as well, they become 
more likely to be infected with the virus. Moreover, norepinephr ine can also make it easier for the virus to invade a 
lymphocyte and, once inside, enhances replication of the virus. Support also comes from a study with nonhuman 
primates, discussed earlier, which suggest s that steps 1 to 4 might apply to HIV. To reiterate, the monkeys were 
infected with SIV, the simian version of HIV. The authors then showed that  the monkeys who were more socially 
isolated (step 1) had higher glucocorticoid levels (step 2), fewer antibodies against the virus (step 3), and a higher 
mortality rate (step 4). How about humans?
(continued) met there, married, returned for honeymoons; folks with connections would maneuver for return visits, making it an annual paid 
vacation. (All was not idyllic snif fling heaven at the Cold  Unit, however. An occasional group  would be involved in studies sho wing that, for 
example, being chilled and damp does not cause colds, and would have to stan d around for hours in we t socks.) Unfortunately, be cause of budget 
limitations, the unit has been closed. This para dise lost has been chronicled in at l east one scholarly book, plus articles wit h titles like, "How I Blew 
My Summer Vacation."
* Assuming you are one of the lucky few with AIDS who has enough money, or whose country has enough money, to afford the medica tions.
To begin, starting with the same amount of HIV in your system, a faster decline and a higher mortality rate occur, on 
average, among people who have any of the following: (a) a coping style built around denial; (b) minimal social 
support; (c) a socially inhibited temper ament; (d) more stressors, particularly  loss of loved ones. These are not huge 
effects but, nevertheless, there seems a fa ir consistency in the findings on this. So that seems to qualify for step 1.
Do these individuals also have overact ive stress-responses (step 2)? Glucocorticoid levels are not particularly 
predictive of the course of HIV. However, the more at-ri sk people with the socially inhibited temperaments have 
elevated activity of their sympathetic ner vous system, and the extent of  that overactivity is an even better predictor of 
decline than is the personality itself. So that seems to get us to step 2.Page 89 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmDoes lots of stress, an inhibited temper ament, denial, or lack of social support not only predict higher mortality rates 
(step 4) but a faster decline of immune functio n (step 3)? That seems to be the case as well.
So AIDS seems to follow the Psychoneuroimmune Route.  How about the Lifestyle Ro ute? The medication regimes 
for dealing with HIV can be en ormously complex, and it is quite plausibl e that people who are more stressed are less 
likely to take their antiviral medication, or to take it correct ly. My sense is that lifestyle risk factors have not been all 
that well controlled for in these studies. How about if the connection runs in the opposite direction—what if having a 
faster decline with the disease makes you more socially inhibited, makes fo r fewer social connections? That seems 
quite plausible but, as an im portant control, the personality style has been shown to predict immune profiles many 
months later.
In summary, psychoneuroimmune aspects could well contribute to a link between stress and worsening of aspects of 
AIDS. But more research needs to be done to examine how much stress in fluences whether people comply with their 
treatment regimes, versus how we ll their treatment regimes work.
Latent Viruses
After rhinoviruses and the AIDS virus, there is one last category of viruses—those that, after initially infecting you, 
can go latent. "Latency" means that the virus, once burrowing into some cells of yours, goes into hibernation for a 
while, just lurking near your own cellular DNA, but not yet replicating itself. At some later point, something triggers 
the dormant virus out of latency and it reactivates. After go ing through a couple of rounds of replication the by now 
larger number of
viral particles burrow in and go latent again. The classic example are herpes viruses whic h, after infecting some of 
your neurons, can go latent for years, even  decades, before flaring up out of latency.
This is a clever tactic that viruses have  evolved. Infect some cells, replicate, bur st the cells open in the process, make 
the sort of mess of things that sets off all sorts of alarms  in the immune system and, ju st as those activated immune 
cells are about to pounce, burr ow into another round of cells. While the im mune cells are cleani ng up, the virus goes 
latent again.
The next clever thing that viruses have done? They don' t reactivate at any old time. They wait until the immune 
system of the host organism is lousy, and then gun for some quick rounds of replication. And when are immune 
systems often at their lousiest? You got it. It's been endlessly documented that  latent viruses like herpes flare up 
during times of physical or psychological stress in all sorts of species. It's the same thing with some other viruses that 
go latent, like Epstein-Barr virus and varicella-zoster (which causes chicken pox and shingles).
So hats off to these highly evolved viruses. Now a key questio n. How does a latent herpes vi rus that, after all, is just 
some unschooled little stretch of DNA sitting mothballe d inside a bunch of your neurons, know that you are 
immunosuppressed? One possibility is that herpes is always  attempting to come out of latency and, if your immune 
system is working fine, it snuffs out the attempt. A seco nd possibility is that herpes  can somehow measure how the 
immune system is doing.
Amazingly, the answer has emerge d in the last few years. Herpes doesn't m easure how your immune system is doing. 
It measures something else that, for its purposes, gives it the information it needs—it measures your glucocorticoid 
levels. Herpes DNA contains a stretch that is sensitive to el evated glucocorticoid signals, and when levels are up, that 
DNA sensor activates the genes involved in coming out of latency. Epstein-Barr and va ricella-zoster contain this 
glucocorticoid-sensitive stretch as well.
And now for something even more fiendish ly clever. You know what else herpes  can do once it infects your nervous 
system? It causes your hypothalamus to  release CRH which releases ACTH which raises glucocorticoid levels. 
Unbelievable, huh? So you don't even need a stressor. Herpes infects you, artificially pushes you to step 2 with your 
elevated glucocorticoid levels, which gets you to step 3, and allows the virus to come out of latency. Moreover, 
elevated glucocorticoid levels impair your immune  defenses against activated herpes. This leads to
step 4—a cold sore flare-up. And we think we're so  clever with our big brains and opposable thumbs.
We've now looked at several favorite topics in psychone uroimmunol-ogy, and can see that stress can increase the 
likelihood, the severity, or both of some immune-related di seases. All of this is a prel ude for considering the most 
contentious subject in th is whole field. The punch line is one of the mo st important in this book, and runs counter to 
what is distressingly common folk wisdom.
STRESS AND THE BIG C
What does stress have to do with getting cancer?Page 90 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe first piece of evidence suggesting stress may increase th e risk of a cancer diagnosis comes from animal studies. 
There is, by now, a reasonably convinci ng animal-experimenta tion literature showing that st ress affects the course of 
some types of cancer. For exampl e, the rate at which some tumors grow in mice can be affected merely by what sort 
of cages the animals are housed in—the mo re noisy and stressful, the faster the tumors grow. Other studies show that 
if you expose rats to electric shocks from which they can eventually escape, they reject transpla nted tumors at a 
normal rate. Take away the capacity to escape, yet give the same total number of shocks, and the rats lose their 
capacity to reject tumors. Stress mice by putting their cages  on a rotating platform (basically, a record player), and 
there is a tight relationship between the number of rotations  and the rate of tumor growth. Substitute glucocorticoids 
for the rotation stressor, an d tumor growth is accelerated as well. Thes e are the results of very careful studies 
performed by some of the best scientists in the field.
Does stress work through the Psychoneuroimmune Route in these animals? Seemingl y at least partially. These 
stressors raise glucocorticoid levels in these studies. And these glucocorticoids directly influence tumor biology 
through both immune and non-immune realms. As a first mech anism, the immune system co ntains a specialized class 
of cells (most notably, natural killer cells) that preven t the spread of tumors. Stre ss suppresses the numbers of 
circulating natural killer cells in these studies. A second  route is probably non-imm unologic. Once a tumor starts 
growing, it needs enormous amounts of energy, and one of the first things that tumors do is send a signal to the 
nearest
blood vessel to grow a bush of capillaries into the tumor. Such angio-genesis allows for the delivery of blood and 
nutrients to the hungry tumor. Glucocorticoids, at the concentration generated during stress, aid angiogenesis. A final 
route may involve glucose deliv ery. Tumor cells are very g ood at absorbing glucose from  the bloodstream. Recall the 
zebra sprinting away from the lion: en ergy storage has stopped in order to increase concentratio ns of circulating 
glucose to be used by the muscles. But, as my own lab reported some years back , when circulating glucose 
concentrations are elevated in rats du ring stress, at least one kind of experimental tumor can grab the glucose before 
the muscle does. Your storehouses of energy, intended for your muscles, are being emptied and inadvertently 
transferred to the ravenous tumor instead.
So we have some stress-cancer links in  animals, and some psy-ch oneuroimmune mechanisms to  explain those effects. 
Does this apply to humans? Two big features of these animal  studies dramatically limit their relevance to us. First, 
these were studies of induced tumor, where tumorous cells ar e injected or transplanted in to the animal. So we're not 
looking at stress causing cancer in these animals, we're looking at stress  altering the course of  cancers introduced by 
artificial routes. No animal studies to my knowledge have  shown that stress increases the incidence of spontaneous 
tumors. Furthermore, most of these studies have relied on tumors that are cause d by viruses. In such cases, viruses 
take over the replication machinery of a cell and cause it to start dividing and growing out of control. In humans most 
cancers arise from genetic factors or expo sure to environmental carcinogens, rather  than from viruses, and those have 
not been the subject of study with la boratory animals. So a cauti onary note from the anim al studies: stress can 
accelerate the growth of a nu mber of tumors, but these are types of cancers of limited relevance to humans, and 
introduced through completely artificial means.
Thus, we turn our attention to humans. Our first, simplest question: Is a history of major stressors associated with an 
increased risk of having can cer somewhere down the line?
A number of studies seemed to show this, but they all su ffered from the same proble m, namely, that they were 
retrospective. Again, someone with a can cer diagnosis is more likely to rememb er stressful events than someone with 
a bunion. How about if you do a retrospective study where you rely upon a history of verifiable stressors, like the 
death of a family member, loss of a job, or a divorce? A couple of studies have reported a link between such major 
stressors and the onset of colon cancer five to ten years later. A number of studies,
especially of breast cancer patients, have  had a "quasi-prospective" design, assessi ng stress histories of women at the 
time that they are having a biopsy for a breast lump, comparing those who get a cance r diagnosis with those who 
don't. Some of these studies have show n a stress-cancer link, and this should be solid—after all, there can't be a 
retrospective bias, if the women don't know yet if they ha ve cancer. What's the problem here? Apparently, people can 
guess whether it will turn out to be cancer at a better than ch ance rate, possibly reflectin g knowledge of a family 
history of the disease, or personal ex posure to risk factors. Thus, such qu asi-prospective studies are already quasi-
retrospective, and of the least reliable kind.
When you rely on the rare prospectiv e studies, there turns out not to be good evidence for a stress-cancer link. For 
example, as we will see in chapter 14 on depression, having a major depression is closely linked to both stress and 
excessive glucocorticoid secretion, and one famous study of two thousand men at a Western Electric plant showed 
that depression was associated with doubling the risk of cancer, even up to decades later. But a careful reexamination 
of those data showed that the depressi on-cancer link was attributab le to a subset of men who were depressed as hell 
because they were stuck worki ng with some major carcinogens.Page 91 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSubsequent prospective studies of other populations have show n either no depression/cancer link, or a tiny one that is 
biologically meaningless. More over, these studies have not ru led out the alternative Lifestyle Route, in that depressed 
people smoke and drink more, two routes to increase the risk of cancer. Similar findings  emerge from the careful 
prospective studies of bereavement as a stressor—no link with subsequent cancer.
Thus, we shift to a different literature. We'll be seeing in  chapter 11 how sleep deprivat ion and altered sleep patterns 
(such as with night shifts) are major st ressors. In searching for a link between stress and in creased risk of cancer, it 
may not be surprising to find that wome n who have spent long periods (decades in  these studies) wo rking night shifts 
have an increased risk of breast cancer. However, the most plausible explanation here has nothing to do with stress. 
Instead, a shifted day/night schedule dram atically decreases the level of a light-responsive hormone called melatonin, 
and depletion of this hormone greatly  increases the risk of a number of  types of cancer, including breast cancer.
More suggestive links go by the wayside as well. As discussed earlier, individuals who get organ transplants are at 
risk for rejecting them, and one of the prevention strategies is to give them glucocorticoids in order to suppress the 
immune system past the point of being
able to reject the organ. In a small subset of such individu als, there is an increased inci dence of a few types of skin 
cancer (of the less serious, non-melanoma  kind). Moreover, as noted, if someone's immune system is massively 
suppressed because of AIDS, there is an  increased incidence of a handful of types of cancers. So do these findings 
tighten the links between cancer and st ress? No. This is because: (a) stress never suppresses the immune system to 
that extent; (b) even when the immune system is suppressed that much, only a small subset of organ transplant or 
AIDS patients get cancer; and (c) it is only a tiny subset of cancers that no w become more common.
So besides those two reports about colon cancer, there is no particular support for the idea that stress increases the risk 
of cancer (and, it should be noted, this conclusion include s numerous studies of breast can cer, the type of cancer most 
frequently assumed by people to be stress related). But is there a subset of individuals who have a particular (and 
poor) style of coping with stress that puts them more at risk for cancer? We already saw,  in chapter 5, the notion of 
there being personality types that are more prone toward func tional gastrointestinal disord ers. Is there a. cancer-prone 
personality, and can it be interpreted in the context of coping poorly with stress?
Some scientists think so. Much of the work in this area has b een done with breast cancer , in part because of the 
prevalence and seriousness of the disease.  However, the same pattern has been reported for other cancers as well. The 
cancer-prone personality, we're told, is one of repression—emotions held inside, particularly those of anger. This is a 
picture of an introverted, re spectful individual with a strong desire to please—conforming and compliant. Hold those 
emotions inside and it increases the likelihood that ou t will come cancer, acco rding to this view.
Most of these studies have been retros pective or quasi-prospectiv e, and we have seen the problems endemic to such 
studies. Nonetheless, the prospec tive studies have shown there to be some link, though a small one.
Are we in the realm of Psychoneuroimmune Route steps 1 through 4? No one has shown that yet, in my opinion. As 
we will see in chapter 15, a repressed pe rsonality is associated wi th elevated glucocorticoid levels, so we're in the 
range of step 2. But, to my knowledge, no one has shown evidence for step 3—some sort of immune suppression— 
occurring, let alone it being of a magnitude relevant to cance r. In addition, none of the good prospective studies have 
ruled out the Lifestyle Route (such as smoking, drinking, or, in the case of breast cancer , more fat consumption). So 
the jury remains out on this one.
So collectively, we have, with the ex ception of two studies concerning one type of cancer, no overall suggestion that 
stress increases the risk of cancer in humans.
Stress and Cancer Relapse
What if your cancer has been cured? Do es stress increase the risk of it coming  back? The handful of studies on this 
subject don't suggest that there's a conn ection—a few say yes, an equal number, no.
Stress and the Course of Cancer
Now on to the most complex and controversial issue of all. Sure, stress may not have anything to do with whether you 
come down with cancer, but once you have  cancer, will stress make a tumor grow faster, increasing your risks of 
dying from the disease? And can st ress reduction slow down tumor growth, extending survival times?
As we saw above, stress will accelerate tumor growth in animals, but those ty pes of instigated tumors and their 
biology are of limited relevance to the way humans get cancer. So we have to look at studies of humans. And here the 
subject is a mess.Page 92 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWe begin by looking at whether different coping styles pr edict different cancer  outcomes. When you  compare patients 
who respond to their cancer with a "fighting spirit" (that is , they are optimistic and assert ive) with those who collapse 
into depression, denial, and repression, the former  live longer, after contro lling for cancer severity.
Findings like these prompted studies in which clinicians atte mpted to intervene, to reduce stress and inculcate more of 
that fighting spirit in people, in order to influence the patient's cancer outcome. The landmark study of this type was 
carried out in the late 1970s by the psychiatrist David Spiegel of Stanford University. Women who had just gotten a 
metastatic breast cancer diagnosis were ra ndomly assigned to either  a group that received st andard medical care or a 
group that, in addition, had intensive supportive group psychotherapy with other breast cancer patients. As Spiegel has 
emphasized in his accounts of this famous study, he went in to it anticipating that the group therapy intervention might 
decrease psychological distress in patients, but he certainly didn't ex pect that it would affect  the biology of the cancer. 
Amid his skepticism, what he found was that the group ther apy intervention extended life sp an an average of eighteen 
months, a whopping great effect.
This made front-page news. But there' s been a big problem since then—it's just not clear if a psychosocial 
intervention actually works. Since the Spiegel study , there have been roughly a dozen others, and
they are evenly split as to whether ther e is any protective effect from group therapy. In wh at was probably the most 
thorough attempt at a replication of Spiegel's findings, a study published in 2001 in the prestigious New England 
Journal of Medicine, there was no effect on survival time.
Why has this finding been so difficult to replicate? Spiegel and others give a plausible explanation, having much to do 
with the massive changes that have occu rred over the years in the "culture of  cancer." Not that many decades ago, 
getting cancer had a weirdly shameful quality to it—doctors wouldn't want to tell their patients about the 
embarrassing and hopeless diagnosis; patients would hide having the disease. As one example, in a 1961 survey, a 
boggling 90 percent of American physicians said they did not typically reveal a cancer diagnosis to their patients; 
within two decades, the number was down to 3 percent. Moreover, over the years,  doctors have come  to consider the 
psychological well-being of their patients as essential to fighting the cancer, and see the course of medical treatment 
as a collaboration between themselves and the patient. As Spiegel says, when he began his work in the 1970s, the 
biggest challenge was to get patients in the "experimental" group to be willing to waste their time with something as 
irrelevant as group therapy. In contrast, by the 1990s vers ions of these studies, the bi ggest challenge was to convince 
the "control" subjects to forgo group therapy In this view, it has become difficult to show that introducing a stress-
reducing psychosocial interv ention extends cancer survival  over control subjects because  everyone, including control 
subjects, now recognizes the need to re duce stress during cancer treatment, and seeks psychosocial support all over 
the place, even if it doesn't come with an offi cial stamp of "twice week ly group psychotherapy."
Let's assume this explanation is co rrect, and I do find it to be convin cing. Thus we accept the premise that 
psychosocial interventions that re duce stress do extend cancer survival. Le t's grind through the steps of the 
Psychoneuroimmune Route to see if we can understand why the group therapy has such an effect. Are the 
psychosocial interventions perceived as being stress reducing by the patients (step 1)? There are striking individual 
exceptions, but the studies, overall, show this resoundingly to be the case.
Are those psychosocial interventions a ssociated with a damping of the stress -response (step 2)? A few studies have 
shown that psychosocial interventions can lower glucocorticoid levels. Flip the question the other way—does having 
an overactive stress-response predict s horter cancer survival? No. In the most detailed study of this, following a 
subsequent population of Spiegel's metastatic breast cancer patients,
having high glucocorticoid levels around the time of diagnosis didn't predict a shorter survival time.*So while psychosocial interventions can reduce glucocorticoid levels, th ere's little evidence that elevated 
glucocorticoid levels predict shorter cancer survival. But do cancer patients with more  psychosocial support have 
better immune function (step 3)? Seemingly. Breast cancer patients who reported more stress had lower activities of 
those natural killer cells, while there's higher NK cell activity in women who report more social support or who 
received some sort of group therapy intervention. Were those immune changes relevant to the change in survival time 
(step 4)? Probably not, since someone's levels of NK cell activity didn't predict survival times in these studies.
So there's not much evidence for a Ps ychoneuroimmune Route. How about the Lifestyle Route? There are lots of 
reasons to think lifestyle plays a key role in the link be tween stress and the course of cancer, but it's very hard to 
show, for a subtle reason. One of the gr eat confounds in cancer therapy is that about a quarter of can cer patients don't 
take their medications as often as pr escribed, or miss chemothera py appointments. Go figure, when these treatments 
make you feel so so awful. And what happens in a group therapy setting, when you're surrounded by people going 
through the same hell as you? "You can go the extra round of chemo, I know  you can—yeah, I felt awful the whole 
time during mine, but you can do it, too," or "Have you eaten today? I know, I have no appetite either, but we're going 
to get something to eat right after this," or "Have you taken your meds today?" Compliance goes up. Any sort of 
intervention that increases compliance will increase the success rates of treat ments. And because a cancer patient, Page 93 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmreasonably, would often be very uncomfortable about admittin g that she's not completely complying with a treatment 
regime, it's hard to detect accurately whether any of th e protective effects of psychos ocial therapy are kicking in 
through this route.+
* Instead, independent of the abso lute levels of glucocorticoids, patients whose glucocorticoid levels lacked a 24-hour rhythm at the time had a 
shorter survival time. Given how much this section is, perhaps, reading like a critical dissection of this field, I think it is  worth noting that I was a 
coauthor on this study. We're still utterly puzzled as to why the loss of the daily rhythmic fluctu ation in glucocorticoid leve ls predicted a bad 
outcome. A possibility is that the loss of  the glucocorticoid rhythm is  irrelevant, a red herring, an d the key thing is that th e daily rhythm of some 
other hormone, like melatonin, has been lost. This  is something that is now being investigated.
+ The whole issue of compliance is somethin g Spiegel raises in his writings. His renown ed study is endlessly misinterpreted as explicitly 
supporting a Psychoneuroimmune Route of protection, and I respect him enormously for resisting that bandwagon on which he'd be given a front-
row seat.
What we have here are some extremely interesting but murky waters. There appears to be virtually no link between a 
history of a lot of stress and a greater incidence of cancer, or a greater risk of relapse out of remission. There seems to 
be a link between a certain personality type and a somewh at greater cancer risk, but no studies have shown where 
stress physiology fits into that story, nor have lifestyle confounds been ruled out. Next, the findings are about evenly 
divided as to whether psychosocial interventions th at reduce stress improve cancer  outcomes. Finally, when 
considering the cases where psychosocial  intervention is effective, there's little support for a Psychoneu-roimmune 
Route to explain the efficacy, and good r easons to think that an alternative ro ute involving issues of lifestyle and 
compliance is important.
What does one do with these findings? Right on cue—more re search, of course. Lots more . However, it is time to 
discuss what one should not do with these findin gs in the meantime.
CANCER AND MIRACLES
This leads to a tirade. Once we recogn ize that psychological factors, stress-reducing interventions, and so on can 
influence something like cancer, it is often a hopeful, desperate leap to the conc lusion that such factors can control 
cancer. When that proves to be false, th ere is a corrosive, poisonous flip side: if you falsely believe you had the power 
to prevent or cure cancer through positive thinking, you may then come to believe that it is your own fault if you are 
dying of the disease.
The advocates of a rather damaging ov erstatement of these psyc hology-health relationships are not always addled 
voices from the lunatic fringe. They in clude influential health practitioners whose medical degrees appear to lend 
credence to their extravagant claims. I will focus my attention here on the claims of Bernie S. Siegel, a Yale 
University surgeon who has been wildly effective at disseminating hi s ideas to the public as the author of a bestseller.
The premise of Siegel's still-popular magnum opus, Love, Medicine and Miracles (New York: Harper & Row, 1986), 
is that the most effective way of stimulating the immune sy stem is through love, and that miraculous healing happens 
to patients who are brave enough to love. Siegel purports to demonstrate this.
As the book unfolds, you note that it is a strange world that  Siegel inhabits. When operat ing on anesthetized patients, 
"I also do not
hesitate to ask the [anesthetized] patient not to bleed if circumstances call for it," he a sserts (p. 49). In his world, 
deceased patients come back as  birds (p. 222), there are unnam ed countries in which individu als consistently live for a 
century (p. 140), and best of all, peop le who have the right spirituality not only successfully fight cancer but can drive 
cars that consistently break down for other people (p. 137).
This is relatively benign gibberish, and history buffs may even feel comforted by those among us who live the belief 
system of medieval peasants. Where th e problems become appallingly serious is when Siegel concentrates on the 
main point of his book. No matter how often he puts in disclaimers saying that he's not trying to make people feel 
guilty, the book's premise is that (a) cancer can be caused by psychosocial factors in the person; (b) cancer (or any 
other disease, as far as I can tell) is cu rable if the patient has sufficient courage, love, and spirit; (c) if the patient is not 
cured, it is because of insufficient am ounts of those admirable traits. As we have just seen, this  is not how cancer 
works, and a physician simply should not go about telling seriously ill people otherwise.
His book is full of descript ions of people who get cancer because of their uprightness a nd lack of spirituality. He 
speaks of one woman who was repressed in her feelings about her breasts: "Naturally [my emphasis], Jan got breast 
cancer" (p. 85)—this seems an indication th at Siegel is aware of the literature  on cancer-prone personality, but this 
constitutes a caricature of thos e mostly careful studies. Of another patient: "She held all her feelings inside and 
developed leukemia" (p. 164). Or, in an  extraordinary stat ement: "Cancer generally seems to appear in response to 
loss ... I believe that, if a person avoids emotional growth at this time, the impulse behind it becomes misdirected into 
malignant physical growth" (p. 123).Page 94 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmNaturally, those who do have enough courage, love, and spirit can defeat cancer. Sometimes it takes a little prodding 
from Siegel. He advises on page 108 that people with seri ous diseases consider the ways in which they may have 
wanted their illness because we are tr ained to associate sickness with reward ; Siegel cites our receiving cards and 
flowers on page 110. Sometimes Siegel has to be a bit more forceful with a recalcitrant cancer patient. One woman 
was apparently inhibited about drawing something Siegel re quested her to, being embarrassed about her poor drawing 
skills. "I asked [her] how she e xpected to get over cancer if she didn't even have the cour age to do a picture" (p. 81). 
You know whose fault it was if she eventually died.
But once the good patients overcome their attitude problems and get with the program, miracles just start popping up 
everywhere you
look. One patient with the proper  visualizing techniques cured his cancer, his arthritis, and, as long as he was at it, his 
twenty-year problem with impotency as we ll (p. 153). Of another, Siegel writes: "She chose the path of life, and as 
she grew, her cancer shrank" (p. 113). Consider the following exchange (p. 175):
I came in, and he said, "Her cancer's gone."
"Phyllis," I said, "Tell them what happened."
She said, "Oh, you know what happened."
"I know that I know," I said, "But I'd like the others to know."
Phyllis replied, "I decided to live to be a hundred and leave my
troubles to God."
I really could end the book here , because this peace of mind can
heal anything.
Thus, presumably, people who die from cancer never got around to deciding to live to be a hundred. According to 
Siegel, cancer is curable with the righ t combination of attributes, and those people without them may get cancer and 
die of it. An incurable disease is the fault of the victim. He tries to soft en his message now and then: "Cancer's 
complex causes aren't all in the mind," he says (p. 103), and on page 75 he tells us he's interested in a person gaining 
understanding of his or her role in a disease rather than in creating guilt. But when he gets past his anecdotes about 
individual patients and states his premise in its broadest terms, its toxicity is unmistakable: "The fundamental problem 
most patients face is an inability to love  themselves" (p. 4); "I feel that all di sease is ultimately related to a lack of 
love" (p. 180).
Siegel has a special place in his book fo r children with cancer and for the parents of th ose children trying to 
understand why it has occurred. After noting that developmental psychologists have learned that infants have 
considerably greater perceptual capacities than previously beli eved, Siegel says he "wouldn't be surprised if cancer in 
early childhood was linked to messages of parental conflict or disapproval perceived even in the womb" (p. 75). In 
other words, if your child gets cancer, consider the possibility that you caused it.*
And perhaps most directly: "There are no  incurable diseases, only incurable pe ople" (p. 99). (Compare the statement 
by the late stress researcher Herbert Weiner : "Diseases are mere abstractions; they can-
* This was something that inflam ed me when first reading this book fifteen years ago as a puerile single guy; it does so to an indescribable extent 
now that I am a father of young children, and have peers sufferi ng the hell of a seriously ill child.
not be understood without appreciating the person who is ill. " Superficially, Siegel's and Weiner's notions bear some 
resemblance to each other. The latter, howe ver, is a scientifically sound statemen t of the interactions between diseases 
and individual makeups of sick people; the former seems to me an unscientific distortion of those interactions.)
Since at least the Middle Ages, there ha s been a philosophical view of dis ease that is "lapsarian" in nature, 
characterizing illness as the punishment meted out by God for sin (all deriving from humankind's lapse in the Garden 
of Eden). Its adherents obviously predated any knowledge about germs, infection, or the workings of the body. This 
view has mostly passed (although see the endnote for this page for an extraordinary example of this thinking that 
festered in the Reagan administration), but as you read through Siegel's book, you unconsciously wait for its 
reemergence, knowing that disease has to be more than just not having enough groovy New Age spirituality, that God 
is going to be yanked into Siegel's worl d of blame as well. Finally, it bubbles to the surface on page  179: "I suggest 
that patients think of illness not as God's will but as our deviation from God's will. To me it is the absence of 
spirituality that leads to difficulties." Cancer, thus, is what you get when you deviate from God's will.Page 95 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmOh, and one other thing about Siegel's views. He founded a cancer program ca lled Exceptional Cancer Patients, which 
incorporates his many ideas about the na ture of life, spirit, and disease. To my knowledge there have been only two 
published studies of his program and its effects on survival time. Both reported that the program has no significant 
effect on survival. And one last word from the good doctor (p. 185), washing his hands of the first study (the second 
had not yet been published when he wrote his book): "I pref er to deal with individuals and effective techniques, and 
let others take care of the statistics."
Why is it worth going on at length about this subject, to pay so much attention to a more-than-fifteen-year-old book? 
Because of how influentia l Siegel's style of thinking has been. Here is but one chilling ex ample: in one study, breast 
cancer patients were asked what they thought had caused their cancer. Among the hundreds of participants, answers 
came back such as genetics, environm ent, hormones, diet, and breast trauma. And what  was the most common 
attribution, by a wide margin? Stress. This, in a paper published in 2001, at the dawn of our new millennium.
This topic is one that I will return to in the final chap ter of the book when I discu ss stress management theories. 
Obviously, a theme of this book is just how many things can  go wrong in the body b ecause of stress and how 
important it is for everyone to recognize this. However,
it would be utterly negligent to exaggerate the implications of this idea. Every child cannot grow up to be president; it 
turned out that merely by holding hands and singing folk songs we couldn't end all war, and hunger does not 
disappear just by visualizing a world without it. Everything bad in human health now is not caused by stress, nor is it 
in our power to cure ourselves of all our worst medical nightmares merely by reducing stress and thinking healthy 
thoughts full of courage and spirit and love. Would that it were so. And shame on those who would profit from selling 
this view.
POSTSCRIPT: A GROTESQUE PI ECE 0F MEDICAL HISTORY
The notion that the mind can influence the immune system, that emotional distress can change resistance to certain 
diseases, is fascinating; psychoneuroi mmunology exerts a powerf ul pull. Nevertheless, it sometimes amazes me just 
how many psychoneuroimmunologists are popping up. They ar e even beginning to speciate into subspecialties. Some 
study the issue only in humans, others in animals; some analyze epidemiological patterns in large populations, others 
study single cells. During breaks at scientific conferences, you can even get teams of psychoneuroimmunological 
pediatricians playing volleyball against the psychoneuroi mmunological gerontologists. I am old enough, I confess 
frankly, to remember a time when th ere was no such thing as a psychoneuroimmunologist. Now, like an aging 
Cretaceous dinosaur, I watch these ne w mammals proliferating.  There was even a time when it was not common 
knowledge that stress caused immune tissues to shrink—a nd as a result, medical re searchers carried out some 
influential studies and misinterpreted their findings, which indirectly led to the deaths of thousands of people.
By the nineteenth century, scientists and doctors were becoming concerned with  a new pediatric disorder. On certain 
occasions parents would place their apparen tly perfectly healthy infant in bed, tu ck the blankets in securely, leave for 
a peaceful night's sleep—and return in the morning to find the child dead. "Crib death," or sudden infant death 
syndrome (SIDS), came to be recognized during that time . When it happened, one in itially had to explore the 
unsettling possibility that there was foul play or parental ab use, but that was usually elim inated, and one was left with 
the mystery of healthy infants dying in their sleep for no discernible reason.
Today, scientists have made some progress in understandin g SIDS. It seems to arise in infants who, during the third 
trimester of fetal life, have some sort of crisis where thei r brains do not get enough oxygen, causing certain neurons in 
the brain stem that cont rol respiration to become esp ecially vulnerable. But in the nineteenth century, no one had a 
clue as to what was going on.
Some pathologists began a logical course of research in the 1800s. They would carefully autopsy SIDS infants and 
compare them with the normal infant au topsy material. Here is where the su btle, fatal mistake occurred: "normal 
infant autopsy material." Wh o gets autopsied? Who gets practiced on by interns in teach ing hospitals? Whose bodies 
wind up being dissected in gross anatomy by first-year  medical students? Usually, it has been poor people.
The nineteenth century was the time when men with strong backs and a nocturnal bent could opt for a career as 
"resurrectionists"— grave robbers, body snatchers, who would sell corpses to anatomists at  the medical schools for 
use in study and teaching. Over whelmingly, the b odies of the poor, buri ed without coff ins in shallow mass graves in 
potter's fields, were taken; the wealthy, by contrast, would be buried in triple coffins. As body-snatching anxiety 
spread, adaptations evolved for the weal thy. The "patent coffin" of 1818 was explicitly and expensively marketed to 
be resurrectionist-proof, and cemeteries of the gentry would offer a turn in the dead-house, wh ere the well-guarded 
body could genteelly putrefy past the point of interest to the dissectors, at which time it could be safely buried. This 
period, moreover, gave rise to the verb burking, named after one William Burke, the aging resurrectionist who 
pioneered the practice of luring beggar s in for a charitable meal and then st rangling them for a quick sale to the 
anatomists. (Ironic-ending department: Burke and his si dekick, after their execution , were handed over to the Page 96 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmanatomists. Their dissecti on included particular attention to their skulls, with an attempt to find phrenological causes 
of their heinous crimes.)
All very helpful for the biomedical community, but with  some drawbacks. The poor tended to express a riotous 
displeasure with the medico- body snatcher complex (to coin  a phrase). Frenzied crowds  lynched resurrectionists who 
were caught, attacked the homes of an atomists, burned hospitals. Concerned about the mayhem caused by unregulated 
preying on the bodies of the poor, governments moved decisively to supervise the preying. In the early nineteenth 
century, various European governments acted to supply adequate bodies to  the anatomists, put the burkers and 
resurrectionists out of business, and
keep the poor in line—all with one handy little law: anyone who died destitute in a poorhouse or a pauper's hospital 
would now be turned over to the dissectors.
Doctors were thus trained in what the normal human body looked like by studying the bodies and tissues of the poor. 
Yet the bodies of poor people are change d by the stressful circumstances of th eir poverty. In the "normal" autopsy 
population of six-month-olds, the infants had typically died of chronic diarrheal disorders, malnutrition, tuberculosis. 
Prolonged, stressful diseases. Their thymus glands had shrunk.
We now return to our pathologists, comparing the bodies of SIDS infants with those of "normal" dead infants. By 
definition, if children had been labeled as having died of SIDS, there was nothing else wrong with them. No prior 
stressors. No shrinking of the thymus gland. The researchers begin their studies and discover something striking: 
SIDS kids had thymuses much larger than those of "norma l "dead infants. This is where they got things backward. 
Not knowing that stress shrinks the thymus gland, they assumed that the thymuses in the "normal" autopsy population 
were normal. They concluded that some children have an abnormally large thymus gland, and that SIDS is caused by 
that large thymus pressing down on th e trachea and one night suffo cating the child. S oon this imaginary disorder had 
a fancy name, "status thymicolymphaticus."
This supposed biological explanation fo r SIDS provided a humane substitute for the usual explanation at the time, 
which was to assume that the parents were either crimin al or incompetent, and some  of the most progressive 
physicians of the time endorsed the "big thymus" story (including Rudolph Virchow, a hero of chapter 17). The 
trouble was, the physicians decided to make some recommendations for how to prevent SIDS, based on this nonsense. 
It seemed perfectly logical at the time. Get rid of that big thymus. Maybe do it surgically, which turned out to be a bit 
tricky. Soon, the treatment of choice emerged: shrink the thym us through irradiation. Estima tes are that in the ensuing 
decades it caused tens of thousands of  cases of cancers in the thyroid gland,  which sits near the thymus. When I 
lecture on this subject, I regularly encount er people whose parents, as late as th e 1950s, had their th roats irradiated for 
this reason.
What recommendations does one offer from the history of status thymicolymphaticus? I could try for some big ones. 
That so long as all people are not born equal and certainly don't get to live equally, we should at least be dissected 
equally. How about something even more
grandiose, such as that something should be done abou t infants getting small thymuses from economic inequality.
Okay, I'll aim for something on a more manageable scientific  scale. For example, while we expend a great deal of 
effort doing extraordinary things in  medical research—say, sequencing th e human genome—we still need smart 
people to study some of the moronically  simple problems, like " how big is a normal thymus?"  Because they are often 
not so simple. Maybe another lesson is that confounds can come from unexpected quarters—bands of very smart 
public health researchers wres tle with that idea for a living. Perhaps the best moral is that when doing science (or 
perhaps when doing anything at all in a society as judgmental as our own), be very careful and very certain before 
pronouncing something to be th e norm—because at that instant, you have ma de it supremely diff icult to ever again 
look objectively at an exception to that supposed norm.
9
STRESS AND PAIN
In Joseph Heller's classic novel about World War II, Catch-Page 97 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm22, the antihero, Yossarian, has an unlikely argument
with someone about the nature  of God. Unlikely because
they are both atheists, which would presumably lead to
agreement about the subject. However, it turns out that
while Yossarian merely does not believe in the existence of a God and
is rather angry about the whole concept, the God that she does not
believe in is one who is good and warm and loving, and thus she is
offended by the vehemence of his attacks.
"How much reverence can you have fo r a Supreme Being who finds it necessa ry to include such phenomena as 
phlegm and tooth decay in His divine system of creation? What in the world was runnin g through that warped, evil, 
scatological mind of His when He robbed old people of the power to control their bowel movements? Why in the 
world did He ever create pain?"
"Pain?" Lieutenant Scheisskopf's wife pounced upon the word victoriously. "Pain is a useful symptom. Pain is a 
warning to us of bodily dangers."
"And who created the dangers?" Yossarian demanded. He lau ghed caustically. "Oh, He was really being charitable to 
us when He gave us pain! Why couldn't He have used a doorbe ll instead to notify us, or on e of his celestial choirs? Or 
a system of blue-and-red neon tubes ri ght in the middle of each person's forehead. Any ju kebox manufacturer worth 
his salt could have done that. Why couldn't He?"
"People would certainly look silly walking around with red neon tubes in the middle of their foreheads."
"They certainly look beautiful now writhing in agony or stupefied with morphine, don't they?"
Unfortunately, we lack neon lights in the middle of our foreheads, and in the absence of such innocuous signs, we 
probably do need pain perception. Pain can hurt like hell, but it can inform us that we are sitting too close to the fire, 
or that we should never again eat the novel item that just gave us food poisoning. It effectively discourages us from 
trying to walk on an injured limb that is better left immob ilized until it heals. And in our westernized lives, it is often a 
good signal that we had better see a doctor before it is to o late. People who congenially lack the ability to feel pain (a 
condition known as pain asymbolia) are a mess; because they can't feel pain  when they step do wn with too much 
force, their feet may ulcerate,  their knee joints may disintegrate, and their long bones may crack; they burn themselves 
unawares; in some cases, they even  lose a toe without knowing it.
Pain is useful to the extent that it motivates us to modify  our behaviors in order to reduce whatever insult is causing 
the pain, because invariably that insult is damaging our tissues. Pain is useless and debilitating, howe ver, when it is 
telling us that there is something dreadfully wrong that we can  do nothing about. We must praise the fact that we have 
evolved a physiological system that lets us know when our stomachs are empty. Yet at th e same time we must deeply 
rue our evolving physiological syst em that can wrack a terminal cancer  patient with unrelenting pain.
Pain, until we get the lights on our foreheads, will remain a necessary but highly problematic part of our natural 
physiology. What is surprising is how malleable pain signals are—how readily the intensity of a pain signal is 
changed by the sensations, f eelings, and thoughts that coincide with the pain. One example of this modulation, the 
blunting of pain perception during some circumstances of stress, is the subject of this chapter.
THE BASICS OF
PAIN PERCEPTION
The sensation of pain originates in r eceptors located throughout our body. Some  are deep within the body, telling us 
about muscle aches, fluid-filled, swollen joints, or damage to organs. Or even something asPage 98 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmGeorge Cruikshank, The Headache, hand-colored etching, 1819.
mundane as a distended bladder. Others, in our skin, can tell us that we have been cut, burned, abraded, poked, or 
compressed.* Often, these skin receptors  respond to the signal of local tissue  damage. Cut yourself with a paring 
knife, and you will slice open various cells of microscopic si ze that then spill out their pr overbial guts; and, typically, 
within this cellular soup now flooding out of the area of injury is a variety of chemical messengers that trigger pain 
receptors into action. The tissue injury al so triggers an influx of cells of the immune system, which are there to scarf 
up and dispose of those sliced -up cells. The swelling ar ound the injury site because of this infiltration is what we call 
inflammation, and those in flammatory cells release chemicals that  make pain receptors more sensitive.
Some pain receptors carry information only about pain (for exam ple, the ones responding to cuts); others carry 
information about both pain and everyday sensations. How are the two differentiated?
* Great factoids: the pain receptors that respond to heat cont ain receptors for something called capsaicin. What is capsaicin? A compound found in 
red chilies. That's why spicy food tastes hot. And what other type  of receptor is found in those same neurons? One that respond s to the key 
component of horseradish, wasabi, and mustard.
By intensity. For example, by way of va rious tactile receptors on my back, I am greatly pleased to have my back 
scratched and rubbed by my wife. Howeve r, as evidence that there are limits to  all good things, I would not at all 
enjoy it if she vigorously scratched my back with coarse sandpaper. Similarly, we may be pleased to have our thermal 
receptors stimulated by warm sunlight but not by boiling wa ter. Sometimes pain consists of everyday sensations writ 
large.
Regardless of the particular type of pain and the pa rticular receptor act ivated, all these receptors send nerve 
projections to the spinal cord. This can activate a spinal reflex, where spinal neurons rapidly send commands to your 
muscles (and thus, for example, you jerk  your finger away from the flame). Information about the painful stimulus is 
also sent up to the brain (a lot more on this later).
SENSORY MODULATION OF PAIN PERCEPTION
A striking aspect of the pain system is how readily it can be modulated by other factors. The strength of a pain signal, 
for example, can depend on what other sensory information is tunneled to the spine at the same time. This, it turns out, 
is why it feels great to have a massage when you have sore muscles. Chronic, throbbing pain can be inhibited by 
certain types of sharp, brief sensory stimulation.
The physiology behind this is one of the most elegant bits of wiring I know of in the nervous system, a circuit sorted 
out some decades ago by the physiologists Patrick Wall and Ronald Me lzack. It turns out that the nervous 
projections—the fibers carrying pain information from your periphery to the spinal cord—are not all of one kind. 
Instead, they come in different classes. Probably the most relevant dichotomy is  between fibers that  carry information 
about acute, sharp, sudden pain and those that carry information about slow, diffuse, constant, throbbing pain. Both 
project to spinal cord neurons and activate them, but in different ways (see part A of the figure on page 190).Page 99 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmTwo types of neurons found in the spinal cord are being affected by painful information (see part B of the illustration). 
The first (X) is the same neuron diagrammed before, which relays pain information to the brain. The second neuron 
(Y) is a local one called an interneuron. When Y is stimulated, it inhibits the activity of X.
As things are wired up, when a sharp, painful stimulus is felt, the information is sent on the fast fiber. This stimulates 
both neurons X and Y As a result, X sends a painful signal up th e spinal cord, and an
The Wall-Melzack model of how pain information is passed to the brain, and how it can be modulated by the brain. 
(A) A neuron (X) in the spinal cord sends a signal to the brain that something painful has happened, once it is 
stimulated by a pain fiber. Such pain fibers can carry information about sudden pain or slow, diffuse pain. (B) A more 
realistic version of how the system actually works, showing why sudden and slow pain information is differentiated. In 
the case of sudden pain, the sudden pain fiber stimulates ne uron X, causing a pain signal to be relayed to the brain. 
The sudden pain fiber also stimulates an interneuron (Y) that inhibits neuron X, after a brief delay. Thus, neuron X 
sends a pain signal to the brain for only a short time. In contrast, the slow pain fiber stimulates neuron X and inhibits 
interneuron Y. Thus, Y does not inhibit X, and X continues to  send a pain signal to the brain, producing a slow, diffuse 
pain. (C) Both stimulatory and inhibitory fibers come from the brain and send information to neuron X, modulating its 
sensitivity to incoming pain information. Thus, the brain can sensitize neuron X to a painful signal, or blunt its 
sensitivity.
instant later, Y kicks in and shuts X off. Thus the brain sens es a brief, sharp burst of pain , such as after stepping on a 
tack.
By contrast, when a dull, throbbing pain is felt, the information is sent on the slow fiber. It communicates with both 
neurons X and Y, but differently from the way it does on the fast fiber. Once again the X neuron is stimulated and lets 
the brain know that something painful has occurred. This time, however, the slow fiber inhibits the Y neuron from 
firing. Y remains silent, X keeps firing, and your brain senses a prolonged, throbbing pain, the type you'd feel for 
hours or days after you've burned yourself. The pain physi ologist David Yeomans has framed the functions of the fast 
and slow fibers in a way that fits perfectly with this book:  what the fast fibers are about is getting you to move as 
quickly as possible (from the source of the piercing pain). What the slow fibers are about is getting you to hunker 
down, immobile, so you can heal.
The two classes of fibers can interact, and we often intentionally force them to. Suppose that you have some sort of 
continuous, throbbing pain—sore muscles, an insect bite, a painful blister. How can you stop the throbbing? Briefly 
stimulate the fast fiber. This adds to th e pain for an instant, but by stimulating the Y interneuron, you shut the system 
down for a while. And that is precisely what we often do in all of those circ umstances. Experiencing a good vigorous 
mauling massage inhibits the dull throbbing pain of sore muscles for a while. An insect bite throbs and itches 
unbearably, and we often scratch hard right around it to dull the pain. Or we'll pinch oursel ves. In all these cases, the 
slow chronic pain pathway is shut down for up to a few minutes.Page 100 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThis model has had important clinical implications. For one thing, it has allowed scientists to design treatments for 
people with severe chronic pain syndromes (for example, a patient who has had a nerve root crushed in his back). By 
implanting a little electrode into the fast pain pathway and attaching it to a stimulator on the person's hip, they enable 
the patient to buzz that pathway now and then to turn  off the chronic pain; works wonders in many cases.
PAIN THAT GOES ON LONGER THAN NORMAL
If someone pokes you over and over, you will continue to f eel pain each time. Similarly, if you get an injury that 
causes days of inflammation, th ere are likely to be days of pain as well. But sometimes, something goes wrong with 
pain pathways somewhere between those pain recep-
tors and your spine, and you feel pain long after the noxiou s stimulus has stopped or the injury has healed, or you feel 
pain in response to stimuli that shouldn't be painful at all. Now you've got problems— allo-dynia, which is feeling pain 
in response to a normal stimulus.
Some versions of allodynia can arise do wn at the level of the pain receptors  themselves. Recall how when there is 
tissue injury, inflammatory cells infilt rate into the area and release chemicals that make those local pain receptors 
more excitable, more easily st imulated. Now those infl ammatory cells are pret ty indiscriminate as to where they dump 
these chemicals, and some of them can leach over in the directio n of receptors outside th e area of injury, thereby 
making them more excitable. And sudden ly the perfectly healthy ti ssue surrounding the injure d area starts to hurt as 
well.
Allodynia can also o ccur when neurons in the pain pa thway are injured. If nerve endi ngs are severed near the pain 
receptors, those inflammatory cel ls release growth promoting factors that pr ompt the nerves to regenerate. Sometimes 
the regeneration is bollixed up so that the nerve endings rewire into a tangle called a neuroma, which tends to be 
hyperexcitable, sending pain signals from perfectly healthy tissue. And if the nerve projections carrying pain 
information are severed near the spine,  this can lead to a cascade of infl ammatory events that results in a 
hyperexcitable spinal cord. A mere touch now feels excruciating.
The Wall-Melzack pathway model on page 190 explains another instance of allodynia,  as seen in severe cases of both 
types of diabetes. As we saw in chapte r 4, elevated levels of glucose in th e bloodstream can increase the risk of 
atherosclerotic plaques, clogging up blood vessels. As a result, insufficient energy gets through those vessels, 
potentially damaging nerves that depend on that energy. In general it is the fast fibers, which take more energy to 
operate than the lower-maintenance slow fibers, that are dama ged. Thus, the person loses the ability to shut down the 
Y interneuron in that pathway, and what  would be a transient pain for anyone  else becomes a constant throbbing one 
for a diabetic.
NO BRAIN, NO PAIN
We started with pain receptors scatte red all over the body, and have gotten  as far as the sp inal cord  receiving 
projections from them. From there, a lot of thos e spinal neurons that are activated by pain send
projections up into the brain. This is where things become really interesting.
Consider three scenarios involving pain. First, a soldier is  in the middle of some appalling battle, people being 
slaughtered all around. He is injured—not life-threaten ing, but serious enough to warrant evacuation. Second, 
consider someone with advanced liver cancer, administered an ex perimental drug. Within a few days, her gut hurts 
like hell, a sign of the drug killing the tumor cells. Or third, someone is abrading their rear end raw while 
enthusiastically having sex on a rough carpet. What do they all have in common? Their pain's not going to seem all 
that painful—the war's over for me; the drug's working; what carpet? The brain's interpretation of pain can be 
extremely subjective.
A study conducted in the 1980s provides a striking example of  this subjectivity. A scien tist examined a decade's worth 
of records at a suburban hospital, noting how many painkillers were requested by patients who had just had 
gallbladder surgery. It turned out that patients who had vi ews of trees from their windows  requested significantly less 
pain medication than those who looked out on blank walls. Other studies of chronic pain patients show that 
manipulating psychological variables such as the sense of control over events al so dramatically changes the quantity 
of painkillers that they request (this important finding wi ll be elaborated upon in th e final chapter of the book).
This is because the brain is not a mind less pain-ometer, simply m easuring units of ouchness. Certainly some parts of 
the brain allow you to make some objective assessments ("Whoa, this water is WAY too hot for the baby's bath"). 
And there are factors that can modulate  how much those pain-ometer areas regi ster pain—for example, oxytocin, the 
hormone released in connection with birth and maternal behavior in mammals, will blunt pain responsiveness in these 
pathways. But most of what the brain's responses to pain are about is generating emotional responses and giving Page 101 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmcontextual interpretations about the pain. This is how being shot in the thigh, gasping in pain, can also leave you 
gasping in euphoric triumph—I've survived this war, I'm going home.
Three important things about the emotional ways the brain interprets and responds to pain:
First, the emotional/interpretative level can be dissociated from  the objective amount of pain signal that is coursing up 
to the brain from the spine. In other words, how much pain you feel, and how
unpleasant that pain feels, can be two separate things. That 's implicit in the war, cancer , and tush-abrad ing scenarios. 
An elegant study shows it more explicitly. In it, volunteers dipped their hands into hot water before and after being 
given a hypnotic suggestion that they feel no pain. During both hand dips, brain imaging was carried out to show 
which parts of the brain were becoming active. The sensation-processing part of the cortex (kind of a pain-ometer in 
this case) was activated to identical extents in both cases, reflecting the si milar number of h eat-sensitive pain 
receptors being triggered to roughly the equivalent extent in both cases. But the more emotional parts of the brain 
activated only in the pre-hy pnosis case. The pain was the same in both cases; the response to it was not.
As a second point, those more emotive parts of the brain not only can alter how you respond to pain information 
coming up the spinal cord; t hose areas of the brain can alter how the spinal cord responds to pain information.
And the third point: this is where stress comes in big time.
STRESS-INDUCED ANALGESIA
Chapter 1 recounted anecdotal cases of people who, highly aroused during battle, did not notice a severe injury. This 
is certainly a useful thing for a soldier,  or a zebra, who still needs to function  despite those circumstances. One of the 
first to document this phenomenon of  stress-induced analgesia was an anesthesiologist, Henry Beecher, who 
examined injured soldiers as a battlef ront medic in World War II and compared  them with civili an populations. He 
found that for injuries of similar severity, approximately 80 percent of civilians requested morphine, while only a third of the soldiers did.
Few of us experience stress-indu ced analgesia in the midst of battle. For us, it is more likely to happen during some 
sporting event where, if we are sufficiently excited and invo lved in what we are doing, we  can easily ignore an injury. 
On a more everyday level, stress-indu ced analgesia is experienced by the dr oves who exercise. In variably the first 
stretch is agony, as you search for every possible excuse to stop before you suffer the coronary that you now fear. 
Then suddenly, about half an hour into this self-flagell ation, the pain melts away. You even start feeling oddly 
euphoric. The whole venture seems like th e most pleasant self-improvement con ceivable, and you plan to work out 
like this daily until your hundredth birthday (with all vows,
of course, forgotten the next day when you start the painful process all over again).*
Traditionally many hard-nosed laboratory scientists, when encountering something like stress-induced analgesia, 
would relegate it to the "psychosomatic" realm, dismissi ng it as some fuzzy aspect of "mind over matter." The 
analgesia, however, is a real biological phenomenon.
One bit of evidence for that a ssertion is that stress-induced analgesia occurs in other animals as well, not just in 
humans emotionally invested in the succes s of their nation's army or their office' s softball team. This can be shown in 
animals with the "hot-plate test." Put a rat on a hot plate; then turn it on. Carefully time how long it takes for the rat to 
feel the first smidgen of discomfort, when it picks up its f oot for the first time (at which point the rat is removed from 
the hot plate). Now do the same thing to a rat that has been stressed—forced to swim in a tank of water, exposed to 
the smell of a cat, whatev er. It will take longer for this rat to notice  the heat of the plate:  stress-induced analgesia.
The best evidence that such anal gesia is a real phenomenon is the neurochemi stry that has been discovered to underlie 
it. The tale begins in the 1970s, with the subject that interested every ambitious, cutting-edge neurochemist of the 
time. It concerned the various opiate drugs that were being used recreationally in vast numbers: heroin, morphine, 
opium, all of which have similar chemical structures. In the early 1970s, three groups of neurochemists almost 
simultaneously demonstrated that these opiate drugs bound to specific opiate receptors in th e brain. And these 
receptors tended to be located in the parts of the brain th at process pain per ception. This turned out to solve the 
problem of how opiate drugs block pain—they activate those descending pathways that blunt the sensitivity of the X 
neuron shown in the illustration on page 190.
Terrific—but two beats later, someth ing puzzling hits you. Wh y should the brain make receptors for a class of 
compounds synthesized in poppy plants? The realization rushes  in; there must be some chemical—a neurotransmitter? 
a hormone?—made in the body that isPage 102 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* A recent study that I find fascinating: Ta ke a bunch of jocks, of both genders, let th em compete at their sport, and you'll f ind that they've 
developed stress-induced analgesia as a resu lt (as measured by, say, their ability to keep their hand in a bucket of ice water for a longer period after 
the athletics than before). For the women, the key variable is the exercise, in  that the analgesia will also be produced by tim e on an exercise bike. In 
contrast, for the men, the key va riable is the competition, in that the analgesia is also indu ced by a competitive video game.
structurally similar to opiates. Some kind of endogenous morphine must occur naturally in the brain.
Neurochemists went wild at this point looking for endogenous morphine. Soon they found exactly what they were 
looking for: endogenous compounds with chemical structures reminiscent of the opiate drugs. They turned out to 
come in three different classes—  enkephalins, dynorphins, and the most famous of them all, endorphins (a contraction 
for "endogenous morphines"). The opiate receptors were discovered to bind  these endogenous opio id compounds, just 
as predicted. Furthermore, the opioids were synthesized and released in parts of the brain that regulated pain 
perception, and they would make some of the neurons that relay pain signals in the spine less excitable. (Opiate refers 
to analgesics not normally made by the body, such as heroin or morphine. Opioid refers to those made by the body 
itself. Because the field began with the study of the opi ates—since no one had discovered the opioids as yet—the 
receptors found th en were called opiate receptors. But clearly, their real job is to bind the opioids.)
Chapter 7 introduced the finding that the endorphins and enkephalins also regulate sex hormone release. An additional 
intriguing finding concerning opioid action emerged: rel ease of these compounds expl ained how acupuncture worked. 
Until the 1970s, many Western scientists had heard about the phenomenon, but most had written it off, dumping it 
into a bucket of anthropological oddities—inscrutable Ch inese herbalists sticking needles into people, Haitian 
shamans killing with voodoo curses, Jewish  mothers curing any and all diseases with their secret-recipe chicken soup. 
Then, right around the time of the explosion in opiate research, Nixon ventured to China, and documentation started 
coming out from there about the reality of acupuncture. Furthermore, scientists noted that Chinese veterinarians used 
acupuncture to do surgery on anim als, thereby refuting the argument that th e painkilling character istic of acupuncture 
was one big placebo effect ascribable to  cultural conditioning (no cow on earth  will go along with unanesthetized 
surgery just because it has a heavy investment in the cultu ral mores of the society in wh ich it dwells). Then, as the 
corker, a prominent Western jour nalist (James Reston of the New York Times) got appendicitis in China, underwent 
surgery, and was administered acupuncture for pain relief. He survived just fine. Hey, this stuff must be legit—it even 
works on white guys.
Acupuncture stimulates the rel ease of large quantities of endogenous opioids, for reasons no one really understands. 
The best demonstration of this is what is called a subtraction experiment: block the activity of endogenous opioids by 
using a drug that blocks the opiate
receptor (most commonly a dr ug called naloxo ne). When such a receptor is blocked, acupuncture no longer 
effectively dulls the perception of pain.
Endogenous opioids turn out to be rele vant to explaining placebos as well. A placebo effect occurs when a person's 
health improves, or the person's asse ssment of their health improves, merely  because they believe that a medical 
procedure has been carried  out on them, regardless of whether it actually has. This is where patients in a study either 
get the new medicine being tested or, without knowing it, merely a sugar pill, and sugar pill folks get somewhat 
better. Placebo effects remain  controversial. A highly publicized paper in the New England Journal of Medicine a few 
years back surveyed the efficacy of placebo treatments across the board in a ll realms of medicine. The authors 
examined the results of 1 14 different studies, and conc luded that, overall, receivi ng a placebo treatment had no 
significant effects. The study irritated me no end, because the au thors included all sorts of  realms where it seemed 
crazy to expect a placebo effect to o ccur. For example, the st udy informed us that be lieving you've received an 
effective medical treatment when you act ually have not has no beneficial eff ects for epilepsy, elevated cholesterol 
levels, infertility, a bacterial infection, Al zheimer's disease, anemia, or schizophrenia.
Thus, the placebo effect got trashed an d, amid the triumphant chest-thumpi ng by all sorts of dead-white-male 
elements of the medical establishment, what was lost in that paper was a cl ear indication that placebo effects are 
highly effective against pain.
This makes a great deal of sense, given what we have now s een about pain processing in the brain. As an example of 
such a placebo effect, IV infusion  of painkillers is more effective if the patien t sees the infusion occu rring than if it is 
done on the sly—knowing that a pain-reducing procedure is be ing carried out adds to its effectiveness. I saw a great 
example of this a few years back when  my then two-year-old daughter came down with an ear infection. She was 
miserable beyond consolation, clearly in tons of pain. Off to the pediatrician and, amid much wailing and 
protestations of pain, she had her ears ex amined. Yup, she's got a h uge infection, both ears, said the doc, disappearing 
to get an injection of antibiotics. We turn to find our daughter looking serene. "My ears feel much better now that the 
doctor fixed them," she announ ced. Placeboed by having some instrument stuck in her ears.
Not surprisingly, it turns out that they work by releasing endogenous opioids. As but one example of the evidence for 
that, block opiate receptors with na loxone, and placebos no longer work.Page 103 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAll of this is a prelude to the discovery  that stress releases opioids as well. Th is finding was first reported in 1977 by 
Roger Guillemin. Fresh from winning the Nobel Prize for the di scoveries described in chapter 2, he demonstrated that 
stress triggers the release of one type of endorphin, beta-endorphin, from the pituitary gland.
The rest is history. We all know about the famed runner's high that kicks in after about half an hour and creates that 
glowing, irrational eupho ria, just because the pain has gone away. Du ring exercise, beta-endo rphin pours out of the 
pituitary gland, finally building up to levels in the bloodstream around the 30-minute mark that will cause analgesia. 
The other opiates, especially the enkeph alins, are mobilized as we ll, mostly within the brai n and spine. They activate 
the descending pathway originating in the brain to shut off th e X neurons in the spinal cord , and they work directly at 
the spinal cord to accomp lish the same thing. Moreover, they also work at the pain r eceptors in the skin and organs, 
blunting their sensitivity. All sorts of other stressors produce similar effects. Surgery, low blood sugar, exposure to 
cold, examinations, spinal ta ps, childbirth—all do it.* Certain stressors also cause analgesia through "nonopioid-
mediated" pathways. No one is quite sure how those work, nor whether there is a systematic pattern as to which 
stressors are opioid-mediated.
So stress blocks pain perception, enabling you to sprint away from the lion despite your mauling, or at least to put up 
with the muscle ache of smiling obsequiously non-stop dur ing the stressful meeting with the boss. This explains 
everything. Unless it happens to be the sort of stressful situation that makes pain worse instead of better.
WHY IS MUZAK IN THE
DENTIST'S OFFICE PAINFUL?
All that stress-induced analgesia stuff ma y be swell for that disemb oweled zebra, but what if you're the sort of person 
where just seeing the nurse taking the cap off the hypodermic needle for the blood draw makes your arm throb? What 
we've got now is stress-induced hyperalgesia.
The phenomenon is well documented, if studied less than stress-induced analgesia. What is known about it makes 
perfect sense, in that
* It should be obvious to anyone who has gone through childbirth or at least observed it at close quarters—as I have twice sinc e the previous 
edition's version of this chapter was wr itten—that those opiates do squat once  those contractions  really get going.
Vic Boff, New York Polar Bear Club member known as "Mr. Iceberg," sitting in the snow  after a swim during the 
blizzard of 1978.
stress-induced hyperalgesia does not act ually involve more pain pe rception, and has nothing to do with  pain receptors 
or the spinal cord. Instead, it involves more emotional react ivity to pain, interpreting the same sensation as more 
unpleasant. So stress-induced hyperalgesia is just in your h ead. On the other hand, so is st ress-induced analgesia, just Page 104 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htma different part of your head. The pain-ometer parts of your brain respond to pain normally in people with stress-
induced hyperalgesia. It's  the more emotional parts of th e brain that are hype rreactive, the parts of  the brain that are 
the core of our anxieties and fears.
This can be shown with brain-imaging studies, showing what parts of pain circuitry in the brain become overly active 
during such hyperalgesia. Moreover, anti-anxiety drugs like Valium and Librium block stress-induced hyperalgesia. 
People who score high on tests for neuroticism and anxiety are most prone toward hyperalgesia during stress. 
Amazingly, so are rat strains that have been bred for high anxiety.
So we're at one of those crossroads that  makes science look kind of lame. Just  like, "Stress can increase appetite. And 
it can decrease it, too," we'v e got, "Stress can blunt pain perception. But sometimes it does the opposite." How to 
combine these opposing effects of stress? My sense from the literature is that the analgesia arises more in 
circumstances of massive, physical injury. Half your body is burned and your ankle's sprained, and you're trying to 
carry a loved one out of some inferno—that's when stress- induced analgesia is going to dominate. Discover some 
weirdo growth on your shoulder that hurts a bit, decide in a panic that you've got fatal melanoma, be informed by an 
unsympathetic answering machin e that your doctor has just left for a th ree-day weekend. That 's when the stress-
induced hyperalgesia will dominate, as you lie awake for th ree nights, thanks to how painful you've now decided the 
spot feels.
This brings up a subject that n eeds to be treaded on carefully. So carefully in fact that in the last edition of the book, I 
bravely made a point of not mentioning a word about it. Fibromyalgia. This is the mysterious syndrome of people 
having markedly reduced pain tolerance and multiple tender spots throughout the body, often paralyzing extents of 
pain, and no one can find anything wrong—no pinched nerve, no arthritis, no inflammation. Mainstream medicine has 
spent decades consigning fibrom yalgia to the realm of psychosomatic medici ne (that is, "Get out of my office and go 
see a shrink"). It doesn't help that fibromyalgia is more likel y to strike people with anxious or neurotic personalities. 
There's nothing wrong, is the typical me dical conclusion. But this may not quit e be the case. For starters, sufferers 
have abnormally high levels of activity in parts of the brain that mediate the emotional/contextual assessments of pain, 
the same areas activated in stress-induced  hyperalgesia. Moreover, their cerebral sp inal fluid contains elevated levels 
of a neurotransmitter that mediates pain (called Substance P) . And, as noted in chapter 2,  unexpectedly, glucocorticoid 
levels are below normal in people with fibromyalgia. Maybe these are highly stressed peopl e with some sort of defect 
in glucocorticoid secretion, and because  of that deficiency, instead of gett ing stress-induced analgesia, they get 
hyperalgesia.* I don't know. No one knows, as far as I can tell. But there is increas ing evidence that there is 
something biologically real going on in these cases. There, I've broken the ice on this subject; stay tuned for the next 
edition.
* However, just to complicate that specul ation, glucocorticoids are not particularly  involved in stress-induced analgesia.
PAIN AND CHRONIC STRESS
Time now for our usual question. What happens with pain perception when there is chronic stress? With stress-
induced hyperalgesia, the answer  seems to be, the pain just keeps going, maybe even worsens. Bu t what about stress-
induced analgesia? In the acute , lion-mauling scenario, it is adaptive. To follow the structure laid out in previous 
chapters, this represents the good news. So what's the bad news? How does an excess of op ioid release make us sick 
in the face of the chronic ps ychological stressors that we specialize in? Do es chronic stress ma ke you an endogenous 
opioid addict? Does it cause so much of the stuff to be released that you can't detect useful pain anymore? What's the 
downside in the face of chronic stress?
Here the answer is puzzling because it di ffers from all the other p hysiological systems examin ed in this book. When 
Hans Selye first began to note that chronic stress causes illn ess, he thought that illness occurs because an organism 
runs out of the stress-response, that the various hormones a nd neurotransmitters are depleted, and the organism is left 
undefended to the pummelings of the stressor. As we've seen in previous chapters, the mode rn answer is that the stress
-response doesn't become depleted; instead, one gets sick  because the stress-respons e itself eventually becomes 
damaging.
Opioids turn out to be the exception to the rule. Stress-induced  analgesia does not go on fo rever, and the best evidence 
ascribes this to depletion of opioids. You are not permanently out of business, but it takes a while for supply to catch 
up with demand.
Thus, to my knowledge, there is no stress-related disease th at results from too much opi oid release during sustained 
stressors. From the standpoint of this book and our propensity toward chronic psychological stressors, that is good 
news—one less stress-related disease to worry about. From the standpoint of pain perception and the world of real 
physical stressors, the eventual depletion of the opioids m eans that the soothing effects of  stress-induced analgesia are 
just a short-term fix. And for the elderly woman agonizi ng through terminal cancer, the soldier badly injured in 
combat, the zebra ripped  to shreds but still alive, the consequence is obvious. The pain will soon return.Page 105 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm10
STRESS AND MEMORY
I'm old now, very old. I've seen a lot of things in my time  and by now, I've forgotten a lot of them but, I tell you,
that was one day that I'll remember forever like it was ye s-terday. I was twenty-four, maybe twenty-five. It was a
cold spring morning. Raw, gray. Gray sky, gray slush, gray people. I was looking for a job again and not having much 
luck, my stomach complaining about the bad rooming house coffee that was last night's dinner and today's breakfast. I 
was feeling pretty hungry, and I suspect I was starting to look pretty hungry too, like some half-starved animal that 
picks through a garbage can, and that co uldn't make much of an impression in an interview. And neither could the 
shabby jacket I was wearing, that last one I hadn't hocked.
I was plodding along, lost in my thoughts, when some guy comes sprinting around the corner, yelling with 
excitement, hands up in the air. Before  I could even get a good look at him,  he was shouting in my face. He was 
babbling, yelling about something being "classic," something called "classic." I couldn't understand what he was 
talking about, and then he sprinted off. What the hell, crazy guy, I thought.
But round the next corner, I see more people running aro und, yelling. Two of them, a man and woman, come running 
up to me and, by now, I tell you, I knew that something was up. They grabbed me by the arms, shouting "We won! 
We won!! We're getting it back!" They were pretty excited but at least maki ng more sense than the first guy, and I 
finally figured out what they were saying. I couldn't believe it. I tried to speak, but I got all choked up, so I hugged 
them as if they were my brother and si ster. The three of us ran into the str eet, where a big crowd was forming—people 
coming out of the office buildings,
people stopping their cars, jumping out. Everyone screaming and crying and laughing, people shouting, "We won! We 
won!" Somebody told me a pregnant woman had gone right into labor, another that some old man had fainted right 
away. I saw a bunch of Navy guys, and one of them stepped right up and kissed this woman, a total stranger, leaning 
her way back—someone snapped a picture of them  kissing, and I heard it became famous afterward.
The weird thing is how long ago this was—the couple who first told me are probably long gone, but I can still see 
their faces, remember how they were dressed, the smell of the guy's afters have, the feel of the breeze that was blowing 
the confetti that people were tossing out the windows above. Still vivid. The mind's a funny thing. Well anyway, as I 
was saying, that's a day I'll always remember—t he day they brought back the original Coke.Page 106 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA day to remember!
We've all had similar experiences. Your first kiss. Your wedding ceremony. The moment when the war ended. And 
the same for the bad moments as well. The fifteen seconds when those two guys mugged you. The time the car spun 
out of control and just missed the oncoming truck. Where you were when the earthquake hit, when Kennedy was shot, 
on 9/11. All etched forever in  your mind, when it's incon ceivable that you can recall the slightest thing about incidents 
in the twenty-four hours before that li fe-changing event. Arousing,  exciting, momentous occas ions, including stressful 
ones, get filed away readily.  Stress can enhance memory.
At the same time, we've all had the opposite experience. You' re in the middle of the fi nal exam, nervous and frazzled, 
and you simply can't remember a fact that would come effortlessly at any other time. You're in some intimidating 
social circumstance, and,  of course, at the critical moment, you can't remember the name of the person you have to 
introduce. The first time I was "brought home" to meet my future wife's family, I was nervous as hell; during a 
frantically competitive word game after di nner, I managed to blow the lead of the team consisting of my future mother
-in-law and me by my utter inability at one critical juncture to remember the word casserole. And some of these 
instances of failed memory revolve around infinitely gr eater traumas— the combat vet who went through some 
unspeakable battle catastrophe, the surv ivor of childhood sexual abuse—for whom  the details are lost in an amnesiac 
fog. Stress can disrupt memory.
By now, this dichotomy should seem quite familiar. If stress enhances some function under one circumstance and 
disrupts it under another, think time course, think 30-second sprints across th e savanna versus decades of grinding 
worry. Short-term stressors of mild to moderate severity  enhance cognition, while major or prolonged stressors are 
disruptive. In order to appr eciate how stress affects memory, we need to know something ab out how memories are 
formed (consolidated), how they are retrieved, how they can fail.
A PRIMER OK HOW MEMORY WORKS
To begin, memory is not monolithic, but instead comes in  different flavors. One par ticularly import ant dichotomy 
distinguishes short-term versus long-term memories. With the former, you look up a phone number, sprint across the 
room convinced you're about to forget it, punch in the number. And then it's gone forever. Short-term memory
is your brain's equivalent of juggling some balls in the air for 30 seconds. In contrast, long-term memory refers to 
remembering what you had for dinner last night, the name of the U.S. president, how many grandchildren you have, 
where you went to college. Neur opsychologists are coming to recognize that there is a speci alized subset of long-term Page 107 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmmemory. Remote memories are ones stretching back to your childhood—the name of your village, your native 
language, the smell of your grandmother's baking. They appear to be stored in some sort of archival way in your brain 
separate from more recent long-term memo ries. Often, in patients with a deme ntia that devastates most long-term 
memory, the more remote facets can remain intact.
Another important distinction in memory is that between explicit (also known as declarative) memory and implicit 
(which includes an important subtype called procedural memory) memory. Explicit me mory concerns facts and 
events, along with your conscious awareness of knowing them: I am a mammal, today is Monday, my dentist has 
thick eyebrows. Things like that. In contrast, implicit pro cedural memories are about sk ills and habits, about knowing 
how to do things, even without having to think consciously about them: shifting the gears on  a car, riding a bicycle, 
doing the fox-trot. Memories can be tran sferred between explicit and implicit fo rms of storage. For example, you are 
learning a new, difficult passage from a piece of piano music. Each time that stretch approaches, you must 
consciously, explicitly remember what to do—tuck your elbow in, bring your thumb way underneath after that trill. 
And one day, while playing, you realize you just barreled through that section flawlessly, without having to think 
about it: you did it with implicit, rather than explicit, memory . For the first time, it's as if your hands remember better 
than your brain does.
Memory can be dramatically di srupted if you force something that's implicit into explicit channels. Here's an example 
that will finally make reading this book worth your while—how to make neurobiology work to your competitive 
advantage at sports. You're playing tennis against someone who is beating the pants off of you. Wait until your 
adversary has pulled off some amazing backhand, then offer a warm smile and say, "You are a fabulous tennis player. 
I mean it; you're terrific. Look at that shot you just made. How did you do that? When you do a backhand like that, do 
you hold your thumb this way or that, and what about your other fingers? And how about your butt, do you scrunch 
up the left side of it and put your weight on your right toes, or the other way around?" Do it right, and the next time 
that shot is called for, your opponent/victim will make the
mistake of thinking about it explicitly, and the stroke won't be anywhere near as effective. As Yogi Berra once said, 
"You can't think and hit at the same time. " Imagine descending a flig ht of stairs in an explicit manner, something you 
haven't done since you were two years old—okay, bend my left knee and roll the weight of my toes forward while 
shifting my right hip up slightly—and down you go down the stairs.
Just as there are different types of memory, there are different areas of th e brain involved in memory storage and 
retrieval. One critical site is the cortex , the vast and convoluted surface of the br ain. Another is a region tucked just 
underneath part of th e cortex, called the hippocampus. (That's Latin for "sea horse," which the hippocampus vaguely 
resembles if you've been stuck inside studying neuroanatomy for too long instead of going to the seashore. It actually 
looks more like a jelly roll, but who knows the Latin term for that?) Both of these are regions vital to memory—for 
example, it is the hippocampus and cortex that are preferentially damaged in  Alzheimer's disease. If you want a totally 
simplistic computer metaphor, think of the cortex as your hard drive, where memories are stored, and your 
hippocampus as the keyboard, the means by which you place and access memories in the cortex.
There are additional brain re gions relevant to a different kind of memo ry. These are structures that regulate body 
movements. What do these sites, such as the cerebellum, have to do with memo ry? They appear to be relevant to 
implicit procedural memory, the type you need to perform re flexive, motor actions withou t even consciously thinking 
about them, where, so to speak, your body remembers how to do something before you do.
The distinction between explicit and implicit memory, and the neuroanatomical bases of that distinction, was first 
really appreciated because of one of the truly fascinating,  tragic figures in neurolo gy, perhaps the most famous 
neurological patient of all time. This man, known in the literature only by his initials, is missing most of his 
hippocampus. As an adolescen t in the 1950s, "H.M." had a severe form of epilepsy that was centered in his 
hippocampus and was resistant to drug tr eatments available at that time. In a desperate move, a famous neurosurgeon 
removed a large part of H.M.'s hippocampus, along with mu ch of the surrounding tissue. The seizures mostly abated, 
and in the aftermath, H.M. was left with  a virtually complete inability to turn new short-term memories into long-term 
ones—mentally utterly frozen in
time.* Zillions of studies of H.M. have  been carried out since, and it has slow ly become apparent that despite this 
profound amnesia, H.M. can still learn how to do some thin gs. Give him some mechanical puzzle to master day after 
day, and he learns to put it together at the same speed as anyone else, while steadfastly denying each time that he has 
ever seen it before. Hippocampus and ex plicit memory are shot; the rest of the brain is intact, as is his ability to 
acquire a procedural memory.
This shifts us to the next magnification of examining how the brain handles memories and how stress influences the 
process—what's going on at the level of clusters of neurons within the cortex and hippocampus? A long-standing 
belief among many who studied th e cortex was that each individual cortical ne uron would, in effect , turn out to have a 
single task, a single fact that it knew. This was prompted by some staggeringly important work done in the 1960s by 
David Hubel and Torstein Wiesel of Harvard on what was, in  retrospect, one of the simple r outposts of the cortex, an Page 108 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmarea that processed visual info rmation. They found a first part of the visu al cortex in which each  neuron responded to 
one thing and one thing only, namely a single dot of light on the retina. Neurons that responded to a sequence of 
adjacent dots of light would fu nnel their projections to one neuron in the next layer. And thus, what was this neuron 
responding to? A straight line. A series of these neurons would project to the ne xt level in a way that each neuron in 
that cortical level would respond to a particular moving line of light. This led people to believe that there would be a 
fourth level, where each neuron responded to a particular collection of lines, and a fifth and sixth layer, all the way up 
until, at the umpteenth layer, there would be a neuron that responded to one thing and one thing only, namely your 
grandmother's face at a particular angl e (and next to it would be a neuron that recognized her face at a slightly 
different angle, and then the next one ...). People went looking for what were actually called "grandmother" neurons—
neurons way up in the layers of the cortex that "knew" one thing and one thing only, namely a complexly integrated 
bit of sensory stimulatio n. With time, it became apparent  that there could be very fe w such neurons in the cortex, 
because you simply don't have enough neurons to go ar ound to allow each one to be so narrow-minded and 
overspecialized.
* Brush with fame department: I met H.M. once—he won't remember me of course (ba-dum dum), and it was astonishing. You could st and there all 
day with him repeatedly  introducing himself.
A highly hypothetical neural network involving a neuron that "knows" about Impressionist paintings.
Rather than memory and information being stored in single neurons, they are stored in the patterns of excitation of 
vast arrays of neurons—in trendy jargon, in neuronal "networks." How does one of these work? Consider the wildly 
simplified neural network shown in the diagram above.
The first layer of neurons (neuro ns 1, 2, and 3) are classical  Hubel and Wiesel type neuron s, which is to say that each 
one "knows" one fact for a living. Neuron 1 knows how to recognize Gauguin paintings, 2 recognizes van Gogh, and 
3 knows Monet. (Thus, these hypothetical neurons are more "grandmotherly"—specializing in one task—than any real 
neurons in the brain, but help illustrate well what ne ural networks are about.) Those three neurons project—send 
information to— the second layer in this  network, comprising neurons A to E. Note the projection pattern: 1 talks to 
A, B, and C; 2 talks to B, C, and D; 3 talks to C, D, and E.
What "knowledge" does neuron A have? It gets informat ion only from neuron 1 about Gauguin paintings. Another 
grandmotherly neuron. Similarly, E gets information only from neuron 3 and knows only about Monet. But what 
about neuron C; what does it know about? It knows about Impressionism, the features that these three painters had in 
common. It's the neuron that, metaphorically, says, "I can't tell you
the painter, certainly not the painting, but it's one of thos e Impressionists." It has knowledge that does not come from 
any single informational input, but emerges from the conver gence of information feeding into it. Neurons B and D are 
also Impressionism neuron s, but they're just not as good at it as neuron C, because they have fewer examples to work 
with. Most neurons in your cortex process memory like neurons B through D, not like A or E.
We take advantage of such convergent networks whenever we are trying to pul l out a memory that is almost, almost 
there. Continuing our art history theme, suppose you're trying to remember the name of a painter, that guy, what's his 
name. He was that short guy with a beard (activating your "short guy" neural network, and your "bearded guy" 
network). He painted all those Parisian dancers; it wasn't Degas (two more networks pulled in). My high school art 
appreciation teacher loved that guy; if I can remember her name, I bet I can remember his ... wow, remember that time Page 109 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmI was at the museum and there was that rea lly cute person I tried to talk to in fr ont of one of his paintings ... oh, what 
was the stupid pun about that guy's name, about the train tr acks being too loose. With enough of those nets being 
activated, you finally stumble in to the one fact that is at the intersecti on of all of them: Toulouse-Lautrec, the 
equivalent of a neuron C.
That's a rough approximation of how a neural network operates, and neuroscientists have come to think of both 
learning and storing of memories as involving the "strengthening" of some branches rather than others of a network. 
How does such strengthening occur? For that, we switch to a final level of magnification, to consider the tiny gaps 
between the thready branches of two neurons, gaps called synapses. When a neuron has heard some fabulous gossip 
and wants to pass it on, when a wave of electrical excitation sweeps over it, th is triggers the release of chemical 
messengers—neurotransmitters—that float across the synapse and excite the next  neuron. There are dozens, probably 
hundreds, of different kinds of neurotransmitters, and synapses in the hippocampus and cortex disproportionately 
make use of what is probably the most excitatory neurotransmi tter there is, something called glutamate.
Besides being superexcitatory, "glutamatergic" synapses have  two properties that are criti cal to memory. The first is 
that these synapses are nonlinear in their function. What do es this mean? In a run-of-the -mill synapse, a little bit of 
neurotransmitter comes out of the first neuron and causes the second neuron to get a little excited; if a smidgen more 
neurotransmitter is released, there is a smidgen more excitation, and so on. In  glutamatergic synaps es, some glutamate 
is
released and nothing happens. A larger amount is releas ed, nothing happens. It isn't until a certain threshold of 
glutamate concentration is passed that, suddenly, all hell breaks loose in the second neuron and there is a massive 
wave of excitation. This is what learning something is about. A professor drones on incomprehensibly in a lecture, a 
fact goes in one ear and out th e other. It is repeated again—and, again, it fails to sink in. Finally, the hundredth time it 
is repeated, a lightbulb goes on, "Aha!" and you get it. On a simplistic level, when you finally get it, that nonlinear 
threshold of glutam ate excitation has ju st been reached.
The second feature is even more important. Under the right conditions, when a synapse has just had a sufficient 
number of superexcita-tory glutamate-driven "aha's," so mething happens. The synapse becomes persistently more 
excitable, so that next time it takes less of an excitatory si gnal to get the aha. That syna pse just learned something; it 
was "potentiated," or strengthened. The most amazing thing is that this strengthening of the synapse can persist for a 
long time. A huge number of neuroscientists flail away at figuring out how this process of "long-term potentiation" 
works.
There's increasing evidence that  the formation of new memories might also  sometimes arise from the formation of 
new connections between neurons (in addition to the potenti ating of pre-existing ones) or , even more radically, the 
formation of new neurons themselves. This latter, controvers ial idea is discussed below. For the moment, this is all 
you need to know about how your brain remembers anniversar ies and sports statistics and the color of someone's eyes 
and how to waltz. We can now see what stress does to the process.
IMPROVING YOUR MEMORY DURING STRESS
The first point, of course, is that mild to moderate short-te rm stressors enhance memory. This  makes sense, in that this 
is the sort of optimal stress that we would call "stimula tion"—alert and focused. This  effect has been shown in 
laboratory animals and in humans. One particularly elegant study in this realm was carried out by Larry Cahill and 
James McGaugh at the University of Califo rnia at Irvine. Read a fairly unexciting  story to a group of control subjects: 
a boy and his mother walk through their town, pass this st ore and that one, cross the st reet and enter the hospital 
where the boy's father works, are shown the
X-ray room ... and so on. Meanwhile, the experimental subjects are read  a story that differs in that the central core of 
it contains some emotionally laden material: a boy and his mother walk through their town, pass this store and that 
one, cross the street where ... the boy is hit by a car! He's rushed to the ho spital and taken to the X-ray room.... Tested 
weeks later, the experimental subjects remember their story better than do the controls, but only the middle, exciting 
part. This fits with the picture of "flashbulb memory," in which people vividly remember some highly aroused scene, 
such as a crime they witnessed. Me mory for the emotional components is  enhanced (although the accuracy isn't 
necessarily all that good), whereas me mory for the neutral details is not.
This study also indicated how this effect on memory works.  Hear the stressful story and a stress-response is initiated. 
As we by now well know, this includes the sympathetic nervous system kicking into gear, pouring epinephrine and 
norepinephrine into the bloodstream. Sympathetic stimulation appears to be  critical, because when Cahill and 
McGaugh gave subjects a drug to block that sympathetic activation (the beta-blocker propranolol, the same drug used 
to lower blood pressure), the experimental group did not remember the middle portion of their story any better than 
the controls remembered theirs. Importan tly, it's not simply the case that pr opranolol disrupts memory formation. 
Instead, it disrupts stress-enhanced memory formation (in ot her words, the experimental subjects did as well as the Page 110 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmcontrols on the boring parts of the story, but simply didn't have the boost in memory for the emotional middle 
section).
The sympathetic nervous system pulls this  off by indirectly arousing the hipp ocampus into a more alert, activated 
state, facilitating memory consolidation. This involves an  area of the brain that is going to become central to 
understanding anxiety when we get to chapter 15, namely the amygdala. The sympathetic nervous system has a 
second route for enhancing cognition. Tons of energy are needed for all that explosive, nonlinear, long-term 
potentiating, that turning on of light-bulbs in your hippocampus with glutamate. The sympathetic nervous system 
helps those energy needs to be met by  mobilizing glucose into the bloodstr eam and increasing the force with which 
blood is being pumped up into the brain.
These changes are quite adaptive. When a st ressor is occuring it is a good time to be at your best in memory retrieval 
("How did I get out of this mess last time?") and memory fo rmation ("If I survive this, I'd better remember just what I 
did wrong so I don't get into a mess like
this again."). So stress acutely causes in creased delivery of glucose to the br ain, making more energy available to 
neurons, and therefore better memory formation and retrieval.
Thus, the sympathetic arousal during stress indirectly fuel s the expensive process of re membering the faces of the 
crowd chanting ecstatically about Classic Co ke. In addition, a mild elevation in glucocorticoid levels (the type you 
would see during a moderate, short-term stressor) helps memory as well. This occurs in the hippocampus, where those 
moderately elevated glucocorticoid levels facilitate long-term potentiati on. Finally, there are some obscure 
mechanisms by which moderate, short-term stress makes your sensory receptors more sensit ive. Your taste buds, your 
olfactory receptors, the cochlear  cells in your ears all requir e less stimulation to get exci ted under moderate stress and 
pass on the information to your brain. In that special circumstance, you can pick up the sound of a can of soda being 
opened hundreds of yards away.
ANXIETY: SOME FORESHADOWING
What we've just seen is how moderate and transient stress can enhance th e sort of explicit memories that are the 
purview of the hippocampus. It turns ou t that stress can enhance another type of memory. This is one relevant to 
emotional memories, a world ap art from the hippocampus and its dull concern with factoids. This alternative type of 
memory, and its facilitation by stress, revolves around that  brain area mentioned before, the amygdala. The response 
of the amygdala during stress is going to be critical to understanding anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder in 
chapter 15.Page 111 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAND WHEN STRESS
GOES ON FOR TOO LONG
With our "sprinting across the savanna" versus "worrying about a mortgage" dichotomy loaded and ready, we can 
now look at how the formation and retrieval of memories goes awry when stressors become too big or too prolonged. 
People in the learning and memory business refer to this as an "inverse-U" relationship. As you go from no stress to a 
moderate, transient amount of stress—the realm of stimulation— memory improves. As you then transition into 
severe stress, memory declines.
The decline has been shown in numerous studies with lab rats, and with an array of stressors—restraint, shock, 
exposure to the odor of a cat. The same has been shown when high levels of glucocorticoids are administered to rats 
instead. But this may not tell us anything interesting. Lots of stress or of glucocorticoids may just be making for a 
gener-ically messed-up brain. Maybe the rats would now be lo usy at tests of muscle coordination, or responsiveness to 
sensory information, or what have you. But careful control studies have shown that other aspects of brain function, 
such as implicit memory, are fine. Mayb e it's not so much that learning and me mory are impaired, as much as the rat 
being so busy paying attention to that cat smell, or so agitated by it, that it does n't make much headway solving 
whatever puzzle is in front of it. And wi thin that realm of explicit memory problems, the retrieval of prior memories 
seems more vulnerable to stress than th e formation of new ones. Similar findings have been reported with non-human 
primates.
Hard-charging businessman Billy Sloan is about to lear n that continued stress does inhibit one's memory.
What about humans? Much the same. In a disorder called Cush-ing's syndrome, people develop one of a number of 
types of tumors that result in secretion of tons of glucocorticoids. Understand what goes wrong next in a "Cushingoid" 
patient and you understand half of this book—high blood pressure, diabetes, immune suppression, reproductive 
problems, the works. And it's been know n for decades that they get memory problems, specifically explicit memory 
problems, known as Cushingoid dementia. As we saw in chapter 8, synthetic glucocorticoids are often administered to 
people to control autoimmune or inflammatory disorders. With prolonged treatment, you see explicit memory 
problems as well. But maybe this is due to the disease, ra ther than to the glucocorticoids that were given for the 
disease. Pamela Keenan of Wayne St ate University has studied individuals  with these inflammatory diseases, 
comparing those treated with steroidal antiinflammatory compounds (that is, glucocorticoids) and those getting 
nonsteroidals; memory problems were a function of getting the glucocorticoids, not of the disease.
As the clearest evidence, just a few days of high doses of synthetic glucocorticoids impairs explicit memory in healthy 
volunteers. As one problem in interpretin g these studies, these synthetic hormones work a bit differen tly from the real 
stuff, and the levels administered
produce higher circulating glucocorticoid levels than the body normally produces, even during stress. Importantly, 
stress itself, or infusion of stress levels of the type of gl ucocorticoid that naturally occurs in humans, disrupts memory 
as well. As with the nonhuman studies, im plicit memory is fine, and it's the recal l, the retrieval of prior information, 
that is more vulnerable than the consolidation of new memories.Page 112 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThere are also findings (although fewer in number) showing that stress disrupts something called "executive 
function." This is a little different from  memory. Rather than this being the cognitive realm of storing and retrieving 
facts, this concerns what you do wi th the facts— whether you organize th em strategically, how they guide your 
judgments and decision making. This is the province of a part of the brain called the prefrontal cort ex. We'll be 
returning to this in considerable detail in chapter 16 wh en we consider what stress ma y have to do with decision 
making and impulse control.
THE DAMAGING EFFECTS OF STRESS IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS
How does prolonged stress disrupt hippocampal-dependent memory? A hierarchy of effects have been shown in laboratory animals:
First, hippocampal neurons no longer work as well. Stress can disrupt long-term potentiation in the hippocampus even 
in the absence of glucocorticoids (as in a rat whose adrena l glands have been removed) , and extreme arousal of the 
sympathetic nervous system seems responsible for this. Noneth eless, most of the research in this area has focused on 
the glucocorticoids. Once glucocorticoid levels go from the range seen for mild or moderate stressors to the range 
typical of big-time stress, the hormone no longer enha nces long-term potentiation, that process by which the 
connection between two neurons "remembers" by becoming more excitable. Instead, glucocorticoids now disrupt the 
process. Furthermore, similarly high glucoc orticoid levels enhance something called long-term depression, which 
might be a mechanism underlying the process of forgetting, the flip side of hippocampal aha-ing.
How can it be that increasing glucocorticoid levels a little bit (during moderate stressors) does one thing (enhances the 
potentiation of communication between neurons), while increas ing glucocorticoid levels a lot does the opposite? In 
the mid-1980s, Ron de Kloet of the University of Utr echt in the Netherlands disc overed the very elegant
answer. It turns out that the hippocampus has large amounts of two different t ypes of receptors fo r glucocorticoids. 
Critically, the hormone is about ten time s better at binding to one of the recep tors (thus termed a "high-affinity" 
receptor) than the other. What that mean s is that if glucocorticoid levels only rise a little bit, most of the hormone 
effect in the hippocampus will be mediat ed by that high-affinity receptor. In contrast, it is not until you are dealing 
with a major stressor that the hormone activates a lot of the "low -affinity" receptor. And, lo gically, it turns out that 
activation of the high-affinity receptor en hances long-term potentiatio n, while activation of th e low-affinity one does 
the opposite. This is the basis of the "inverse-U" property mentioned above. In the previous section, I noted that the 
brain region called the amygdala plays a central role in the types of emotional memories involved in  anxiety. But the 
amygdala is relevant here as well. The amygdala gets hi ghly activated during major st ressors and sends a large, 
influential neuronal projection to the hippocampus. Activation of this pathway seems to be a prerequisite for stress to 
disrupt hip-pocampal function. Destroy a rat's amygdala, or  sever its connection to the hippocampus, and stress no 
longer impairs the kind of memory that the hippocampus mediates, even amid the usual high glucocorticoid levels. 
This explains a finding that harks back to the subject of stress "signatures," and also demonstrates that some activities 
can represent a challenge to physical allostasis without being psychologically
Neurons of the hippocampus of a rat. On the left, health y neurons; on the right, neurons with their projections 
atrophied by sustained stress.
aversive. For example, sex raises glucocorticoid levels in  a male rat— without activating the amygdala and without 
disrupting hippocampal function.Page 113 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSecond, neural networks get disconnected. If you look back at the diagram on the "Impressionism neuron" (see page 
208), you'll see that there are symbols indicating how one neuron talks to another, "projects" to it. As mentioned a few 
paragraphs after that, those projections are quite literal—long multibranched cables coming out of neurons that form 
synapses with the multibranched cables of other neurons. These cables (known as axons and dendrites) are obviously 
at the heart of neuronal communication and neuronal networks . Bruce McEwen has shown that, in a rat, after as little 
as a few weeks of stress or of exposure to excessive glucocorticoids, those cables begin to shrivel, to atrophy and 
retract a bit. Moreover, the sa me can occur in the primate brain. When that happens, synaptic connections get pulled 
apart and the complexity of your neural networks declines. Fortunately, it appears that at the end of the stressful 
period, the neurons can dust themselves off and regrow those connections.
This transient atrophy of neuronal pr ocesses probably explains a characteris tic feature of memory problems during 
chronic stress. Destroy vast acres of neurons in the hi ppocampus after a massive stroke or late terminal stage 
Alzheimer's disease, and memory is profoundly impaired. Memories can be completely lost, and never again will 
these people remember, for example, so mething as vital as the names of thei r spouses. "Weaken" a neural network 
during a period of chronic stress by retracting some of the complex branches in th ose neuronal trees, and the 
memories of Toulouse-Lautrec's name are still there. You simply have to tap in to more and more associative cues to 
pull it out, because any given network is less effective at doing its job. Me mories are not lost, just harder to access.
Third, the birth of new neurons is inhibited. If you learned your introductory neurobiology any time in the last 
thousand years, one fact that would be hammered in repeatedly is that the ad ult brain doesn't make new neurons. In 
the last decade, it has become clear that  this is utterly wrong.* As a result, th e study of "adult neurogenesis" is now, 
arguably, the hottest topic in neuroscience.
Two features about such neurogenesis are highly relevant to this chapter. First, the hippocampus is one of only two 
sites in the brain
* Actually, the evidence for new neurons in the adult brain wa s first reported in the 1960s by a handful of heretics who were 
generally ignored or hounded out of science. The fi eld has finally ca ught up with them.
where these new neurons originate.* Seco nd, the rate of neurogenesis can be  regulated. Learning, an enriched 
environment, exercise, or expo sure to estrogen all increase the rate of neurogenesis, while the strongest inhibitors 
identified to date are, you guessed it, stress and glucoc orticoids—as little as a few hours of either in a rat.
Two key questions arise. First, when the stress stops, does neurogenesis recover and, if so, how fast? No one knows 
yet. Second, what does it matter that stress inhibits adult neur ogenesis? Intrinsic in this question is the larger question 
of what adult neurogenesis is good for. This is incredibly  controversial, an issue that  has adversaries practically 
wrestling each other on the podiu m during scientific conferences. At one extr eme are studies that suggest that under 
the right conditions, there are tons of neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus, that these new neurons form connections 
with other neurons, and that these new connections, in f act, are needed for certain type s of learning. At the other 
extreme, every one of these findings is questioned. So the jury's out on this one.
Fourth, hippocampal neurons become endangered. As noted, within seconds of the onset of stress, glucose delivery 
throughout the brain incr eases. What if the stressor continues? By ab out thirty minutes into a continuous stressor, 
glucose delivery is no longer enhanced, and has returned to  normal levels. If the stress or goes on even longer, the 
delivery of glucose to the brain is even inhibited, particularly in the hippocampus. Delivery is inhibited about 25 
percent, and the effect is  due to glucocorticoids.+
* The other region supplies new neurons to the olfactory system; for some strange reason, neurons that process odors constantly  die off and have to 
be replaced. It turns out that there is a huge burst in the production of those new ol factory neurons early during pregnancy. T hey are fully on line 
just around the time of birth, and the scientists who discovered this speculate d that these new olfactory neurons are tagged fo r the task of imprinting 
forever on the smell of your offspring (a critical event for mothers of most mammals). And what happens early in pregnancy, whe n those new 
olfactory neurons are showing up, but not quite making sense yet? I bet this has something to do with the famed nausea of pregn ancy, the food 
aversions and olfactory sensitivities. This has nothing to do with stress, but it is  too cool not to mention.
+ An obvious question: over and over I've emphasized how important it is during stress to cut down energy delivery to unessentia l outposts in your 
body, diverting it instead to exercising mu scle. In the previous section, we added your hippocampus to that list of places that  are spoon-fed energy 
with the onset of a stressor. It seems like that would be a clever area to continue to stoke, as the stressor goes on. Why shou ld glucose delivery 
eventually be inhibited there? Probably because, as time goes by, you are running more on automatic, relying more on the implic it memory outposts 
in the brain to do things  that involve reflexive movement—t he martial arts display you put on to disarm the te rrorist or, at le ast, the coordinated 
swinging of the Softball bat at the company
(continued)
Decreasing glucose uptake to this extent in a healthy, happy neuron is no big deal. It just makes the neuron a little 
queasy and lightheaded. But what if the neuron isn't healthy and happy, and is instead in the middle of a neurological 
crisis? It's now more likely to die than usual.Page 114 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmGlucocorticoids will compromise the ability of hippocampal neuron s to survive an array of insults. Take a rat, give it a 
major epileptic seizure, and the higher the glucocorticoid levels at the time of the seizure, the more hippocampal 
neurons will die. Same thing for cardi ac arrest, where oxygen and glucose deliver y to the brain is cut off, or for a 
stroke, in which a single blood vessel in the brain shuts down. Same for concussive head trauma, or drugs that 
generate oxygen radicals. Disturbingly, same thing for the closest there is to a rat neuron's equivalent of being 
damaged by Alzheimer's disease (exposing the neuron to fragments of an Alzhei mer's-related toxin called beta-
amyloid). Same for a rat hippocampus's equivalent of having AIDS-related dementia (induced by exposing the neuron 
to a damaging constituent of the AIDS virus called gpl20).*
My lab and others have shown that the relatively mild energy problem caused by that inhibition of glucose storage by 
glucocorticoids or stress makes it harder for a neuron to contain the eleventy things that go wrong during one of these 
neurological insults. All of these neurolog ical diseases are ultimately energy cris es for a neuron: cut off the glucose to 
a neuron (hypoglycemia), or cut off both the glucose and oxygen (hypoxia-ischemia), or make a neuron work like 
mad (a seizure) and energy stores drop precipitously. Damaging tidal waves of neurotransmitters and ions flood into 
the wrong places, oxygen radicals are generated. If you throw in glucocorticoids on top of that, the neuron is even less 
able to afford to clean up the mess. Than ks to that stroke or seizure, today's the worst day of that neuron's life, and it 
goes into the crisis with 25 percent less energy in the bank than usual.
Finally, there is now evidence that truly prolonged exposure to stress or glucocorticoids can actually kill hippocampal 
neurons. The
(continued) picnic that you've been nervous about. And thus, th e decreased glucose delivery to highfalutin brain regions like t he hippocampus and 
cortex may be a means to divert energy  to those more reflexive brain regions.
* Chapter 3 described how stress can indirectly give rise to a st roke or cardiac arrest. But for the other neurological problem s noted—seizure, head 
trauma, AIDS-related dementia, an d most important, Alzheimer's disease—there is no evidence th at stress or glucocorticoids cause these maladies. 
Instead, the possibility is that  they worsen preexisting cases.
first hints of this came in the late 19 60s. Two researchers showed that if guin ea pigs are exposed to pharmacological 
levels of glucocorticoids (that is, higher levels than the body ever normally generates on its own), the brain is 
damaged. Oddly, damage was mainly limited to the hippo campus. This was right around the time that Bruce McEwen 
was first reporting that the hi ppocampus is loaded with receptors for gluc ocorticoids and no one r eally appreciated yet 
how much the hippocampus was the center in  the brain for glucocorticoid actions.
Beginning in the early 1980s, various researchers, including myself, showed that this "glucocorticoid neurotoxicity" 
was not just a pharmacological effect, but was relevant to normal brain ag ing in the rat. Collectively, the studies 
showed that lots of glucocorticoid expo sure (in the range seen during stress) or lots of stress itself would accelerate 
the degeneration of the aging hippocampus. Conversely, dimini shing glucocorticoid levels (by removing the adrenals 
of the rat) would delay hippocampal aging. And as one might expect by now, the extent of glucocorticoid exposure 
over the rat's lifetime not only determined how much hippocampal degeneration there would be in old age, but how 
much memory loss as well.
Where do glucocorticoids and stress get off killing your brain cel ls? Sure, stress hormones can make you sick in lots 
of ways, but isn't neurotoxicity going a bit beyond the bounds of good taste? A dozen years into studying the 
phenomenon, we're not yet sure.
WHAT ABOUT DAMAGE
TO THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS?
We know from earlier in this chapter that an excess of stress and/or glucocorticoids can disrupt functioning of the 
hippocampus. Is there any evidence that this can include th e sort of overt damage to th e hippocampus that we've been 
discussing? That is, can it disconnect neural networks by the atrophying of processes, inhibit the birth of new neurons, 
worsen the neuron death caused by other neurological insults, or overtly kill neurons?
To date, six sets of findings in humans should raise some worries:
1. Cushing's syndrome. As discussed above, Cushing's involves any of a number of types of tumors that produce a 
vast, damaging excess of glucocorticoids, where the consequences include impairment of hippocampal-dependent 
memory. Monica Starkman at the University of Michigan has used brain imaging techniques on
Cushing's patients to look at the overall size of the brain, an d the sizes of various subsections. She reports that there is 
a selective decrease in the volume of  the hippocampus in these individual s. Moreover, the more severe the 
glucocorticoid excess, th e greater the loss of hippo campal volume and the greater  the memory problems.Page 115 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm2.  Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). As will be disc ussed in more detail in chapter 15, this anxiety disorder can 
arise from a variety of types of traumatic stressors. Work pioneered by Douglas Bremner of Emory University, 
replicated by others, shows that people with PTSD from repeated trauma (as opposed to a single trauma)—soldiers 
exposed to severe and repeated carnage in combat, in dividuals repeatedly abused  as children—have smaller 
hippocampi. Again, the volume loss appears to be only in th e hippocampus, and in at leas t one of those studies, the 
more severe the history of trauma , the more extreme the volume loss.
3.  Major depression. As will be detailed in chapter 14, major depression is utterly intertwined with prolonged stress, 
and this connection includes elevated glucocorticoid levels in about half the people with major depression. Yvette 
Sheline of Washington University and others have shown that prolonged major depression is, once again, associated 
with a smaller hippocampus. The more prolonged the history of depression, the more volume loss. Furthermore, it is 
in patients with the subtype of depression that is most as sociated with elevat ed glucocorticoid levels where you see 
the smaller hippocampus.
4.  Repeated jet lag. Chapter 11 will consider a single but intriguing study ex amining airline flight  attendants with 
long careers of shifting time zones on intercontinental flights.  The shorter the average time  allowed to recover from 
each large bout of jet lag over a career, the smalle r the hippocampus and th e more memory problems.
5.  Normative aging. Work by Sonia Lupien of McGill University, and replicated by others, has examined healthy 
elderly people. Check out what their resting glucocorticoid levels are, the size of their hippocampus, and the quality of 
their hippocampal-dependent memory Then come back some years later and retest them. As will be discussed in 
chapter 12, on aging, there is somewhat of a rise in resting glucocorticoid levels with age in humans, although there is 
a lot of variability in this. What is seen is that those whos e glucocorticoid levels have been rising over the years since 
the study began are the ones who have had the most severe loss of hippocampal volume and the greatest decline in 
memory.
6. Interactions between glucocorticoids and neurological insults. A handful of studies report that for the same severity 
of a stroke, the higher the glucocorticoid levels in a person  at the time they come into an emergency room, the more 
ultimate neurological impairment.
So these studies collectively demonstrat e that glucocorticoids damage the human  hippocampus. Well, let's hold on a 
second. There are some pr oblems and complications:
First, there have been some studies suggesting that PTSD involves lower than normal levels of glucocorticoids. Thus 
it can't be the case that an excess of the hormones is damaging the hippocampus. However, it looks as if in those 
PTSD patients with the low levels, there is excessive sensitivity to the glucocorticoids. So the hormones are still 
plausible culprits.
As a next issue, it isn't clear whether the loss of hippocampa l volume in PTSD is caused by the trauma itself, or by the 
post-traumatic period; amid th at uncertainty, there has been at least one excellent study upending both of those ideas. 
It suggested instead that havi ng a small hippocampus comes before the PTSD and, in fact, ma kes you more likely to 
develop PTSD when exposed to trauma.
Finally, it should be remembered that the aging studies pres ent a relationship that is merely correlative. In other 
words, yes, it could be that increasing glucocorticoid leve ls with age lead to hippocam pal atrophy. But there are at 
least as good reasons to think that it is the other way around, that progressive hippocampal atrophy leads to the rising 
glucocorticoid levels (as will be expl ained more fully in chapter 12, this is  because the hippocampus also helps to 
inhibit glucocorticoid release, such that an atrophied hippocampus isn't very good at that task).
In other words, no one is quite sure yet what is going on. One of the biggest problems is a lack of studies of brains like 
these after people have died. Phenomenally obsessive research could be carried out that would tell us whether the 
hippocampus is smaller because there are fewer of the mi llions of hippocampa l neurons or because neurons have 
fewer and shorter cables connectiong them to other neurons. Or both. If it turned out that there were fewer neurons, 
you might even be able to tell whether it is because more of them have died than  usual, or because fewer of them were 
born. Or, again, both.
Actually, even without the postmortem studies, there are a few hints about the sources of the volume loss. 
Intriguingly, when the tumor that gave rise to the Cushing's syndrome is removed and glucocorticoid levels revert to 
normal, the hippocampu s slowly comes back
to normal size. As noted before, when glucocorticoids cause the cab les connecting neurons to shrivel up, it is not a 
permanent process—stop the glucocorticoid excess and the processes can slowly regrow. Thus, the best guess is that 
the volume loss in Cushing's is based on the retraction of pr ocesses. In contrast, the volume losses in PTSD and major 
depression appear to be something appro aching permanent, in that the loss persis ts in the former case decades after the 
trauma, and, in the latter, years to d ecades after the depression has been gotte n under control with medication. So in Page 116 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthose cases, the volume loss in the hippocampus probably can't be due to shriveling processes of neurons, given that 
the shriveling can reverse.
Beyond that, no one knows at this point why the hippocampus winds up being smaller in these disorders and 
situations. It is the knee-jerk reflex of all scientists to sa y, "More research is needed," but more research really is 
needed in this case. For the moment, I thi nk it is fair to say that there is decen t but not definitive evidence that stress 
and/or prolonged exposure to glucocorticoids can cause structural, as well as functional, changes in the hippocampus, 
that these are changes that yo u probably wouldn't want to have happen to your hippocampus, and that these changes 
can be long-lasting.
What are some of the disturbing implications of these findings? The first concerns the use by neurologists of synthetic 
versions of glucocorticoids (such as hydrocortisone, dexa methasone, or prednisone) after someone has had a stroke. 
As we know from our introduction to glands and hormones in chapter 2, glucocorticoids are classic antiinflammatory 
compounds and are used to reduce the edema, the damaging brain swel ling that often occurs after a stroke. 
Glucocorticoids do wonders to block the edema that occurs after something like a brain tumor, but it turns out that 
they don't do much for post-stroke edem a. Worse, there's increasing evidence th at those famously antiinflammatory 
compounds can actually be pro-inflammatory, worsening inflammation in the injured brain. Yet tons of neurologists 
still prescribe the stuff, despite decad es-old warnings by the best people  in the field and findings that the 
glucocorticoids tend to worsen the neurological outcome. So these recen t findings add a voi ce to that caution—
clinical use of glucocorticoids tends to  be bad news for neurological diseases  that involve a precarious hippocampus. 
(As a caveat, however, it turn s out that huge doses of glucocorticoids can  occasionally help reduce damage after a 
spinal cord injury, for reasons having nothing to do with stress or with much of this book.)
Related to this is the concern that physicians may use synt hetic glucocorticoids to treat problems outside the nervous 
system and, in the
process, might endanger the hippocampus.  A scenario that particularly distur bs me concerns the ability of these 
hormones to worsen gpl20 damage to neurons and its re levance to AIDS-related dementia. (Remember?—the gpl20 
protein is found in the AIDS virus and appears to play a central role in damaging neurons and causing the dementia.) 
If, many experiments down the line, it turns out that glucocorticoids can worsen the cognitive consequences of HIV 
infection, this will be worrisome. That isn't just becau se people with AIDS are under st ress. It's also because people 
with AIDS are often treated with extrem ely high doses of synthetic glucocorticoids to combat other aspects of the 
disease.
This same logic extends to the use of glucocorticoids in other realms of clinical medicine. About 16 million 
prescriptions are written annually in the United States fo r glucocorticoids. Much of the use is benign—a little 
hydrocortisone cream for some poison ivy, a hydrocortisone injection for a swollen knee, maybe even use of steroid 
inhalants for asthma (which is probably not a worrisome route for glucocorticoids to get into the brain). But there are 
still hundreds of thousands of people taking high-dose glucocorticoids to suppress the inappropriate immune 
responses in autoimmune diseases (such as lupus, multiple sclerosis, or rheumatoid arthritis). As discussed earlier, 
prolonged glucocorticoid exposure in these individuals is associated with problems with hippocampal-dependent 
memory. So should you avoid taking glucocorticoids for your autoimmune disease in order to avoid the possibility of 
accelerated hippocampal aging somewhere do wn the line? Almost certa inly not—these are ofte n devastating diseases 
and glucocorticoids are often highly ef fective treatments. Potentia lly, the memory problems are a particularly grim 
and unavoidable side effect.
An even more disturbing implication of these findings is that if glucocorticoids turn out to endanger the human 
hippocampus (making it harder for neurons to survive an insu lt), you're still in trouble, even if your neurologist 
doesn't administer synthetic glucocorticoids  to you. This is because  your body secretes boat loads of the stuff during 
many neurological crises—humans coming into ERs after neurological insults have immensely high levels of 
glucocorticoids in their bloodstreams. And what we know from rats is that the massive outpouring of glucocorticoids 
at that time adds to the damage—remove the adrenals of a ra t right after a stroke or seiz ure, or use a drug that will 
transiently shut down adrenal secretion of glucocorticoids, and less hippocampal damage will result. In other words, 
what we think of as typical amounts of brain damage after a stroke or seizure is damage
being worsened by the craziness of our bodies having stress-responses at the time.Consider how bizarre and maladaptive this is. Lion chases you; you secrete glucocorticoids in order to divert energy 
to your thigh muscles—great move. Go on a blind date, secrete glucocorticoids in order to divert energy to your thigh 
muscles—probably irrelevant. Have a gran d mal seizure, secrete glucocorticoids in order to divert energy to your 
thigh muscles—and make the brain damage worse. This is as stark a demonstration as you can ask for that a stress-
response is not always what you want your body to be having.
How did such maladaptive responses evolve? The most likely explanation is that the body simply has not evolved the tendency not to secrete glucocorticoids during a neurological crisis. Stress-induced glucocorticoid secretion works Page 117 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmroughly the same in all the mammals, birds, and fish ... and it has only been in the last half-century or so that 
westernized versions of just one of those species had mu ch of a chance of surviving something like a stroke. There 
simply has not been much evolutionary pressure yet to make  the body's response to massive  neurological injury more 
logical.
We are now fifty, sixty years into thinking about ulcers, blood pressure, and aspects of our sex lives as being sensitive 
to stress. Most of us recogn ize the ways in which stress can also disrupt  how we learn and remember. This chapter 
raises the possibility that the effects of stress in the nervou s system might extend even to damaging our neurons, and 
the next chapter continues this theme,  in considering how stre ss might well accelerate the ag ing of our brains. The 
noted neuroscientist Woody Allen once said, "My brain is my second-favorite organ." My guess is that most of us 
would rank our brains even higher up on a list.
11
STRESS AND A GOOD NIGHT'S SLEEP
Then there was the day when my son was about two weeks old. He was our first born, and we had been plenty
nervous about how demanding parenting was going to be. It had been a great day—he'd slept well through the
night, waking up a few times to nurse, and took some long
naps during the day that allowed us to do the same. We'd settled into a schedule. My wife did the nursing, and I 
fetched the tureens of cranberry juice th at she had become obsessed  with since giving birth. Our son filled his diapers 
on cue, and his every gesture was confirming how wondrous he was. Things were calm.
In the evening, as he slept and we settled into our old routines, like doing dishes (the first time in days), I indulged 
myself in some editorializing about  the human condition. "You know, this newborn business is really quite 
manageable if you just stay on top of things. You need to work as a team, be organized, roll with the punches." I went 
on fatuously like this for a while.
That night, our son woke up to nurse right after we fell asleep. He was fussy, wouldn't go back to sleep unless I patted 
him repeatedly, protested each time I tried to  stop by waking up. This went on fo r an insane hour and then he needed 
to nurse again. Then, after patting him some more, he responded by blowing out his diaper, making a mess of his 
onesie and me. Then he screamed bloody  murder when I washed hi m off. Finally, he then slept contentedly without 
patting, for about twenty minutes, before needing to nurse again, another blowout soiling of his fresh onesie, followed 
by our discovery that we had no clean ones, having neglected to do the laundry.
Rather than doing something useful, I orated in a half-psych otic state, "We can't do th is, we're going to die, I'm 
serious, people DIE from lack of sleep, it's not possible to do this, it's physiologically proven, we're all going to DIE." 
I swung my arms with emphasis, knocking over and loudly breaking a glass of cranberry juice. This woke up our, by 
then, happily sleeping son, causi ng all three of us to burst into tears. He eventually settled down and slept like a baby 
for the rest of the night, while I tossed anxiously, waiting for him to wake up again.
Contained in this are the two central features of this ch apter. Not getting enough sleep is a stressor; being stressed 
makes it harder to sleep. Yup, we've got a dread vicious cycle on our hands.
THE BASICS OF SLEEP
All things considered, sleeping is pretty creepy. For a third of your life, you're just not there, floating in this suspended 
state, everything slowed down. Except, at points, your br ain is more active than when  you're awake, making your 
eyelids all twitchy, and it's consolidating memories from the day and solving problems for you. Except when it's 
dreaming, when it's making no sense. And then you sometimes walk or talk in your sleep. Or drool. And then there's 
those mysterious penile or cl itoral erections that occur in termittently during the night.*
Weird. What's going on here? To star t, sleep is not a monolithic process, a uniform phenomenon . Instead, there are 
different types of sleep—shallow (also known as stages 1 and 2) sleep, where you are easily awakened. Deep sleep 
(also known as stages 3 and 4, or "slow wave sleep"). Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep, where the puppy's paws 
flutter and our eyes dart around and dr eams happen. There are not only these different stages, but  a structure, an Page 118 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmarchitecture to them. Yo u start off shallow, gradually sleep your way down to slow wave sleep, followed by REM, 
then back up again, and then repeat the
* And this isn't even going into the subject of species that sleep with only half of their brain at a time, in order to keep on e eye and half the brain 
open to look out for predators. Mallards, fo r example, that are stuck on the edge of their group at night keep their outward fa cing eye, and the half 
of the brain that responds to it, preferentially awake. As more  oddities, dolphins can swim while  sleeping and some birds can f ly.
whole cycle about ever y ninety minutes (and as we'll see in chapter 14, something goes wrong w ith the architecture of 
sleep during a major depression).
Not surprisingly, the brain works differently in different stages of sleep. This can be studied by having people sleep in 
a brain scanner, while you measure the levels of activity  of different brain regions. Take some volunteers, sleep-
deprive them for some godawful length of time, stick th em in one of these imaging machines, poke them awake a 
little more while you get a measure of their brains' activity when they're awake, and then, snug as a bug in a scanner, 
let them go to sleep with the scanner running.
The picture during slow wave sleep makes lots of sense. Part s of the brain associated with  arousal activity slow down. 
Ditto for brain regions involved in controlling muscle movement. Interestingly, regions involved in the consolidation 
and retrieval of memories don't have much of a decrease in metabolism. However, the pathways that bring 
information to and from those regions shut down dramatically , isolating them. The parts of the brain that first respond 
to sensory information have somewhat of a metabolic sh utdown, but the more dramatic  changes are in downstream 
brain areas that integrate, a ssociate those bytes of sensory information, and give them meaning. What you've got is a 
metabolically quiescent, sleeping  brain. This makes sense, as deep slow wa ve sleep is when energy restoration occurs. 
This is shown by the fact that the exte nt of sleep deprivation is not a great
predictor of the total amount you will ultimately sleep, but it is a good predictor of how much slow wave sleep there'll 
be—a very active brain or a sleep-deprived brain tends to co nsume a lot of a particular fo rm of energy; the breakdown 
product of that depleted form of energy is th e signal that biases to ward slow wave sleep.
A very different picture emerges durin g REM sleep. Overall, there's an incr ease in activity. Some brain regions 
become even more metabol-ically active than when you're awake. Parts of th e brain that regulate muscle movement, 
brain stem regions that control breathing and heart rate—all increase their metabolic rate. In  a part of the brain called 
the limbic system, which is involved in emotion, there is an increase as well. The same for areas involved in memory 
and sensory processing, especially t hose involved in vision and hearing.
Something particularly subtle goes on in the visual processing  regions. The part of the co rtex that processes the first 
bits of visual information does not show much of an in crease in metabolism, whereas there is a big jump in the 
downstream regions that integr ate simple visual informatio n.* How can this be, when, on  top of it, your eyes are 
closed? This is dreaming.
That tells us something about how dream  imagery arises. But something else that happens in the brain tells us 
something about the content of dreams. There's a part of the brain, briefly mentioned in  the last chapter, called the 
frontal cortex. It's the most r ecently evolved part of the human brain, is disp roportionately huge in primates, and is the 
last part of our brain to fully mature. The frontal cortex is the nearest thing we have to a superego. Starting from toilet 
training, it helps you to do the harder, rather than easier thing—for example, thinking in a logical, sequential manner, Page 119 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmrather than bouncing all over the place c ognitively. It keeps you from  murdering someone just because you feel like it, 
stops you from telling someone exactly what you think of their hideous outfit and instead finds something 
complimentary. The frontal cortex does all this disciplining of you by inhibiting that frothy, emotional limbic 
system.+ If you damage the frontal cortex, someone gets "frontally disinhibited"—doing and saying the things we 
may think about but would never act upon. During REM sleep, metabolism in the frontal cortex goes way down, 
disinhibiting the limbic system to come up with
* Harking back to chapter 10, this  is the Hubel and Weisel part of the visual co rtex that responds to si mple stuff like dots an d lines.
+ Amazingly, the frontal cortex is the last  part of the brain to fully mature, typi cally not going comple tely online until you a re well into your 
twenties. Doesn't that begin to explain a lot of the imprudent things you did back when?
Alfredo Castaneda, Our Dream (detail), 1999.
the most outlandish ideas. That's why dreams are dreamlik e—illogical, nonsequential, hyperemotional. You breathe 
underwater, fly in the air, communicate telepathically; you announce your love to strangers, invent languages, rule 
kingdoms, star in Busby Berkeley musicals.
So those are the nuts and bolt s of sleep. But what is sleep for? You die without it. Even fruit flies do. The most 
obvious answer is to have a stretch where your brain is going at half speed, in order to build up supplies of energy. 
Your brain consumes phenomen al amounts of energy to pull off all that calculus and symphony writing that you do—
the brain constitutes something like 3 percent of your body weight but needs nearly a quarter of the energy. So stores 
tend to decline during the day and some solid slow wave sleep  is needed to restock those stores (mostly of a molecule 
called glycogen, which is also an energy store in liver and muscle).*
* Despite this, your brain is actually pre tty lousy at storing energy, given the magnitude of its energy demands. This comes ba ck to haunt your 
neurons big-time during a number of neurological  disasters involving a shortage of energy.
Others speculate that sleep is for decreas ing brain temperature, letting it cool off from all that daytime brainstorming, 
or for detoxifying the brain. Weirdly, another major reason to sleep is to dream. If you skip a night's sleep, when you 
finally get to sleep the next night, you have more REM sleep than normal, suggesting that you've built up a real deficit 
of dreaming. Some extremely difficult studies that make me  queasy just to contemplate de prive people or animals of 
REM sleep preferentially, and th e study subjects go to pieces much faster th an they do for the eq uivalent amount of 
deprivation of other types of sleep.
Thus, this begs the question of what dreaming is for. To work out unresolved issues about your mother? To provide a 
living for surrealists and dadaists? So you can have a sex dream about some unlikely person in your waking life and 
then act all weird around that person the next morning by the water cooler? Well, mayb e. The marked increase in 
metabolic activity during REM sleep, and in some of the most inhibited areas of the brain during waking, have Page 120 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmsuggested to some a sort of "use it or  lose it" scenario in which dreaming gi ves some aerobic exercise to otherwise 
underutilized brain pathways (that is, the oft-ne glected Busby Berkeley musical brain circuit).
What has become clear is that sleep play s a role in cognition. For example, sleep can facilita te problem solving. This 
is the realm of "sleeping on a problem," and then suddenly discovering a solution the next morning while you're 
cleaning crud out of the corners of your eyes. The neurobiologist Robert Stickgold of Harvard has emphasized that 
this type of problem solving is the kind where a morass of unhelpful facts are broken through to get to feelings. As he 
says, you don't forget a phone number an d then "sleep on it" to remember it. You do it for some complex, ambiguous 
problem.
Both slow wave and REM sleep also seem to play roles in the formation of new memories, the consolidation of 
information from th e previous day, even informatio n that became less accessible to y ou while awake over the course 
of the day. One type of eviden ce supporting this is the fact that if you teach an animal  some task and disrupt its sleep 
that night, the new information isn't consolidated. While this has been shown in many different ways, the 
interpretation remains controversial. As we saw in the last chapter, stress can disrupt me mory consolidation. As we're 
about to see in great detail, sleep deprivation is stressfu l. Maybe sleep deprivation disrupts memory consolidation 
merely because of the stress, which wouldn't prove that sleep  normally helps memory conso lidation. But the pattern of 
memory disruption caused by sleep deprivation is different from that caused by stress.
Another type of evidence is co rrelative. Being exposed to lots of new info rmation during the day is associated with 
more REM sleep that night. Moreover, the amount of certain subtypes of sleep at night predicts how well new 
information is recalled the next day. Fo r example, lots of REM sleep during the night predicts better consolidation of 
emotional information from the day before, while lots of st age 2 sleep predicts better co nsolidation of a motor task, 
and a combination of lots of REM and sl ow wave sleep predicts better retention of perceptual information. Others 
have taken this further, reporting that it's not just the amount of some subtype of sleep that predicts some subtype of 
learning, but whether it occurs early or late in the night.
Another style of evidence fo r the "sleep helps you consolidate memories" story was first obtained by Bruce 
McNaughton of the University of Arizona. As we saw in chapter 10, the hippocampus ha s a central role in explicit 
learning. McNaughton recorded  the activity of single hippocampal neuron s in rats, identifying ones that became 
particularly busy while the rat was lear ning some new explicit information. That night, during slow wave sleep, it 
would be those same neurons that would be particularly busy. Taking that one step further, he showed that patterns of 
activation of hippocampal neurons that occur during learning  are then repeated when th e animal is sleeping. Brain-
imaging studies with humans have shown something similar. There's even evidence that wh en consolidation is going 
on during REM, genes are act ivated that help form new connections between neurons. During slow wave sleep, 
metabolism remains surprisingly high in areas like the hip pocampus. It's as if sleep is the time when the brain 
practices those new memory patterns ov er and over, cementing them into place.
Weirdly, amid this general picture of sleep deprivation disrupt ing cognition, at least one type of learning is facilitated 
by sleep deprivation, as shown in some recent work by a graduate student of mine, Ilana Hairston. Suppose you have 
some unlikely task where you have to l earn to recite the months of the year b ackward as rapidly as possible. Why is 
this going to be hard? Because there will  repeatedly be the pull to  recite the months in th e way that you've done your 
whole life, which is forward; the previous, overlearned version of the task interferes with this new reversal task. Who 
would excel at this task? Someone who has never learned to do January, February, March, etc., automatically in that 
direction. If you sleep deprive some rats and give them a ra t's equivalent of a reversal task, they do better than do 
control animals. Why? Because they can 't remember the prior overlearned vers ion of the task we ll enough for it to 
intrude now.
So now we have the basics of sleep and what it might be good for. Entrez stress.
SLEEP DEPRIVATION AS A STRESSOR
As we glide down into slow wave sl eep, some obvious things occur to facets of the st ress-response system. For 
starters, the sympathetic nervous system shuts down, in favor of that calm, vegetative parasympathetic nervous 
system. In addition, glucocorticoid levels go down. As introduced back in chapter 2, CRH is the hypothalamic 
hormone that gets the pituitary to release ACTH in order to  trigger adrenal release of gl ucocorticoids. Some of the 
hypothalamic control of pitu itary hormone release consists of an accelerat or and a brake—a releasing factor and an 
inhibiting factor. For year s, there's been evidence floating aroun d for a hypothalamic  "corticotropin inhibiting 
factor" (CIF) that would inhibit the rel ease of ACTH, counteracting th e effects of CRH. No one's sure what CIF is, or 
if it really exists, but there's some decen t evidence that CIF is a brain chemical  that helps bring on slow wave sleep 
(called "delta sleep-inducing factor"). Thus, sleep deeply, and you turn off glucocorticoid secretion.
In contrast, during REM, as you're mob ilizing all that energy to generate that outlandish dream imagery and to move 
your eyes rapidly, glucocorticoid secretion and the sympathetic nervous system rev up again. But given that most of 
what counts as a good night's sleep consists of slow wa ve sleep, sleep is predominat ely a time when the stress-Page 121 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmresponse is turned off. This is seen in species whether they're nocturnal or diurnal (that is, sleeping during the dark 
hours, like us). About an hour before you wake up, levels of CRH, ACTH, and glucocorticoids begin to rise. This is 
not just because merely rousing from slumber is a mini-str essor, requiring mobilization of some energy, but because 
those rising stress hormone levels play a role in terminating sleep.
So deprive yourself of sleep, and the sleep-induced decline in the levels of those stress hormones doesn't occur. And, 
no surprise, they rise instead. Glucoc orticoid levels increase and the symp athetic nervous system is activated; 
commensurate with everything that's been reviewed in previous chapters, down go levels of growth hormone and of 
various sex hormones. Sleep deprivation definitely stimulat es glucocorticoid secretion,  although not to a massive 
extent in most studies (unless the sleep deprivation is really prolonged; however, "it
is postulated that these increases [in response to severe sleep  deprivation] are due to the st ress of dying rather than to 
sleep loss," dryly noted one journal article).
The elevated glucocorticoid levels during sleep deprivation pl ay a role in breaking down so me of the stored forms of 
energy in the brain. This, along with many of the glucocorticoid effects on memory, could have something to do with 
why learning and memory are so lousy wh en you're sleep-deprived. That's something we all l earned when doing an all
-nighter and discover ing the next morning during the fi nal exam that we can barely r ecall what month it was, let alone 
any of the factoids crammed in our h eads the previous night. A recent study beautifully demonstrated one way in 
which our brains become impaired when we try to think hard on no sleep. Take a normally rested subject, stick her in 
a brain imager, and ask her to solve some "working memory" problems (holding on to some facts and manipulating 
them—like adding sequences of three-di git numbers). As a result, her frontal cortex lights up metabolically. Now, 
take someone who is sleep deprived and he's awful at the working memory task. And what's going on in his brain? 
What you might have guessed is that frontal metabolism woul d be inhibited, too groggy to get activated in response to 
the task. Instead, the opposite occurs—the fr ontal cortex is activated, but so are larg e parts of the rest of the cortex. It's 
as if sleep deprivation has reduced th is gleaming computer of a frontal cortex to a bunc h of unshaven gibbering 
neurons counting on their toes, having to ask the rest of their cortical buddies to help out with this tough math 
problem.
So why care if sleep deprivation is a st ressor? It's obvious. We're accustomed to all sorts of amenities in our modern 
lives: overnight deliveries of packages , advice nurses who can be called at two in the morning, round-the-clock 
technical support staff. Therefore, people are required to  work under conditions of sleep deprivation. We're not a 
nocturnal species and if a person works at night or works swing shifts, regardless of how many total hours of sleep 
she's getting, it's going against her biological nature. People who work those sorts of hours tend to overactivate the 
stress-response, and there's little habituation that goes on.  Given that an overactive stress-response makes every page 
of this book relevant, it is not surprising that night work or shift work increases the ri sk of cardiovascular disease, 
gastrointestinal disorders, immune suppression, and fertility problems.
A widely reported study a few years back really brought th is into focus. Recall how prolonged stress and 
glucocorticoids can damage the
hippocampus and impair hippocampal-dependent explicit memo ry. Kei Cho of the University of Bristol studied flight 
attendants working for two different airlin es. On one airline, after you worked a transcontinental flight with major jet 
lag, you'd have a 15-day break until being scheduled for the next transcontinental flight. In contrast, on Airline #2, 
presumably with a weaker union, you got a 5-day break before the next transcontinental flight.* Cho controlled for 
total amount of flying time and total number of time zones sh ifted in the course of flying. Thus, Airline #2's crews 
didn't experience more total jet lag, just less time to r ecover. Finally, Cho considered only employees who had been 
doing this for more than five years. He found that Airline #2's attendants had, on averag e, impaired explicit memory, 
higher glucocorticoid levels, and a smaller temporal lobe (the part of the brain that contains the hippocampus). (This 
study was briefly alluded to in chapter 10). This is obviously not a good thing for the employees working under these 
conditions. And this may make it less likely that the flight  attendant will remember that  17C requested a mixture of 
ginger ale and skim milk with ice. But it kind of ma kes one wonder whether the b ack-to-the-grind-after-5-days pilot is 
having trouble remembering whether or not this little ol' switch turns the engine on or off.
These worries about sleep deprivation are relevant to even those whose 9-to-5 job is 9-to-5 during daylight hours. We 
have an unprecedented number of ways to make us sleep deprived, beginning with some thing as simp le as indoor 
lighting. In 1910, the average American slep t nine hours a night, disturbed only by the occasional Model T backfiring. 
We now average 7.5 and declining. When  there's the lure of 24-hour-a-day fu n, activities, and entertainment or, for 
the workaholic, the knowledge that somewhere, in some time zone, so meone else is working while you indulge 
yourself in sleep, that pull of "just a few more minutes," of pushing yourself, becomes irresistible. And damaging.+
* Either out of good manners or fear of getting his keis ter sued, Cho did not identify the airlines.
+ Just to be perfectly up front, I'm being a complete hypocrite here and it's scandalous  that I even have the nerve to spout off about this. For the 
most part I'm without vices— I don't smoke, have never had a dr ink or illicit drug in my life, don 't eat meat or drink tea or c offee. But I'm 
incredibly bad at getting enough sleep; I've  needed a nap since the Carter administra tion. I've got this colleague, William Dem ent, who is Page 122 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmconsidered the dean of sleep res earch, absolutely evangelical abou t the health risks of sleep deprivation, and on days when I'm  really a mess from 
lack of sleep, I live in dread of running into him.  So on this one, do as I say, not as I do.
AND STRESS AS A
DISRUPTOR OF SLEEP
What should happen to sleep during stress? This one's simple, given a zebra-o-centric view of the world: lion coming, 
don't nap (or, as the old joke goes, "The lion and the lamb shall lie down together. But the lamb won't get much 
sleep."). The hormone CRH seems to be most responsible for this effect. As you'll recall, the hormone not only starts 
the glucocorticoid cascade by s timulating ACTH release from the pituitary, but it is also the neurotransmitter that 
activates all sorts of fear, an xiety, and arousal pathways in  the brain. Infuse CRH into a sleeping rat's brain and you 
suppress sleep—it's like throwing ice water onto those happily dozing neurons. Part of this is due to the direct effects 
of CRH in the brain, but part is probably due to CRH activating the sympathetic nervous system. If you go up to high 
altitude without acclimating, your heart is going to  be racing, even when you're not  exerting yourself. This is not 
because you are stressed or a nxious, but simply because your heart has to beat  more often to delive r sufficient oxygen. 
Suddenly you discover that it's awfully hard to fall as leep with your eyeballs throbb ing rhythmically 110 times a 
minute. So the bodily consequences of sympathetic act ivation make sleeping hard.
Not surprisingly, about 75 percent of cases of insomnia are triggered by some major stressor. Moreover, many (but 
not all) studies show that poor sleepers tend to have higher levels of sympathetic arousal or of glucocorticoids in their 
bloodstream.
So, lots of stress and, potentially, little sleep. But stress not only can decrease the total amount of sleep but can 
compromise the quality of whatever sleep you do manage. For exampl e, when CRH infusion decreases the total 
amount of sleep, it's predominantly du e to a decrease in slow wave sleep, ex actly the type of sleep you need for 
energy restoration. Instead, your sleep is dominated by  more shallow sleep stages, meaning you wake up more 
easily—fragmented sleep. Moreover, when  you do manage to get some slow wave sleep, you don't even get the 
normal benefits from it. When slow wa ve sleep is ideal, really restoring thos e energy stores, ther e's a characteristic 
pattern in what is called the delta pow er range that can be detected on an  EEG (electroencephalogram) recording. 
When people are stressed pre-sleep, or ar e infused with glucocorticoids during sleep, you get less of that helpful sleep 
pattern during slow wave sleep.
Glucocorticoids compromise something else that occurs during good quality sleep. Jan Born of the University of 
Lubeck in Germany has shown that if you infuse glucocorticoids into someone while
Jeff Wall, Insomnia, transparency in lightbox, 1994.
they're sleeping, you impair the memory consolidation that would normally be occurring during slow wave sleep.
A CAUSES B CAUSES A CAUS ES B CAUSES . . .Page 123 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWe have the potential for some real problems here, insofar as lack of sleep or poor-quality sleep activates the stress-
response, and an activated stress-response makes for less sl eep or lower-quality sleep. E ach feeds on the other. Does 
that mean that experiencing even a smidgen of stress, or staying up late once to see Ted Koppel interview Britney 
Spears about the evidence for and agains t global warming, and—that's it, you're finished—downward spiral of stress 
and sleep deprivation?
Obviously not. For one thing, as mentioned, sleep deprivation doesn't cause all that massive of a stress-response. 
Moreover, the need to sleep w ill eventually over come the most stre ssful of stressors.
Nonetheless, a fascinating study suggests  how the two halves might interact, along  the lines that the expectation that 
you're going to
sleep poorly makes you stressed enough to get poor-quality sleep. In the study, one group of volunteers was allowed 
to sleep for as long as they wanted, which turned out to be until around nine in the morning. As would be expected, 
their stress hormone levels began to rise around eight. How might you interpret that? These folks had enough sleep, 
happily restored and reenergized , and by about eight in the morning, their brains knew it. Start secreting those stress 
hormones to prepare to end the sleep.
But the second group of volunteers went to sleep at the same time but were told that they would be woken up at six in 
the morning. And what happened with them? At five in the morning, their stress hormone levels began to rise.
This is important. Did th eir stress hormone levels rise three hours earlier th an the other group because they needed 
three hours less sleep? Obviously not. The rise wasn't about th em feeling rejuvenated. It was about the stressfulness of 
anticipating being woken up ear lier than desirable. Their br ains were feeling that antici patory stress while sleeping, 
demonstrating that a sleeping brain is still a working brain.
What might be happening, then, if you go to sleep thinking that not only will you be woken up earlier than you would 
like, but at an unpredictable time? Where any minute could be  your last minute of sleep for the night? It's quite 
possible that stress hormone levels will be elevated throughout  the night, in nervous anticipation of that wake-up call. 
As we've seen, with an elevated stre ss-response during sleep, the quality of the sleep is going to be compromised.
Thus, there is a hierarchy as to what counts as miserable sleep. Continuous, uninterrupted sleep, but too little of it—
deadline looming, go to sleep late, get up early, not good. Even worse is too little sleep that is fragmented. As an 
example, I once did an experime nt where every three hours for days I had to take blood samples from some animals. 
Even though I did next to nothing on these nights and days other than sleep, in fact I got more total sleep per day than 
was usual for me, I was a wreck. But worst of all is too little sleep that is unpredictably fragmented. You finally get 
back to sleep, but with the corrosive knowledge that five hours or five minutes from now, another patient will come 
into the emergency room, or the alarms will go off and it's b ack to the fire truck, or so meone's diaper will slowly but 
surely fill up.
This teaches us a lot about what counts as good sleep and how stress can prevent it. But as we'll see in a couple of 
chapters, this generalizes beyond sleep. When it comes to what makes for psychological stress, a lack of predictability 
and control are at the top of the list of things you want to avoid.
12
AGING AND DEATH
Predictably, it comes at the most unpr edictable times. I'll be lecturing, bored, telling the same story about neurons I
did last year, daydreaming, looking at the ocean of irr itat-ingly young undergraduates , and then it hits, producing
almost a sense of wonderment. "How can you just sit there? Am I the only one wh o realizes that we're all going to die 
someday?" Or I'll be at a scientific conference, this time  barely understanding someone else's lecture, and amid the 
roomful of savants, the wave of bitterness will sweep over me. "All of you damned medical experts, and not one of 
you can make me live forever."
It first really dawns on us emotionally sometime around puberty. Woody Allen, once our untarnished high priest of 
death and love, captures its roundabout assault perfectly in Annie Hall. The protagonist is show n, in flashback, as a 
young adolescent. He is sufficiently depressed for the worried mother to drag him to the family doctor—"Listen to 
what he keeps saying, what's wrong with  him, does he have the flu?" The Alle nesque adolescent, glazed with despair 
and panic, announces in a monotone: "The universe is expa nding." It's all there—the universe is expanding; look how Page 124 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmbig infinity is and how finite we are—and he has been initia ted into the great secret of ou r species: we will die and we 
know it. With that rite of passage, he has found the mother lode of psychic energy that fuels our most irrational and 
violent moments, our most selfish and our most altruistic ones, our neurotic dialectic of simultaneously mourning and 
denying, our diets and exercising, our myths of paradise and resurrection. It's as if we were trapped in a mine, 
shouting out for rescuers, Save us, we're alive but we're getting old and we're going to die.
Morris Zlapo, Gepetto's Dementia, collage, 1987.
And, of course, before dying, most of us will become old,  a process aptly described as not for sissies: wracking pain. 
Dementia so severe we can't recognize our children. Cat fo od for dinner. Forced retirement. Colostomy bags. Muscles 
that no longer listen to our commands, organs that betray us, children who ignore us. Mostly that aching sense that 
just when we finally grow up and learn to like ourselves and to love and play, the shadows lengthen. There is so little 
time.
Oh, it doesn't have to be that bad. Fo r many years I have spent part of each y ear doing stress resear ch on wild baboons 
in East Africa. The people living there, like many people in  the nonwesternized world, cl early think differently about 
these issues than we do. No one seems to find getting old depressing. How could they?—they wait their whole lives to 
become powerful elders. My nearest neighbors are of the Masai tribe, nomadic pastoralists. I often patch up their 
various minor injuries and ills. One day, one of the extremely old men of the vill age (perhaps sixty y ears old) tottered 
into our camp. Ancient, wrinkl ed beyond measure, tips missing from a fe w fingers, frayed ear -lobes, long-forgotten 
battle scars. He spoke only Masai and not Swahili, the lingua franca of East Africa,  so he was accompanied byPage 125 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAn elderly hunter-gatherer shaman in the Kalahari Desert.
his more worldly, middle-aged neighbor, who translated for him. He had an infected sore on his leg, which I washed 
and treated with antibiotic ointment. He  also had trouble seeing— "cataracts" was my barely  educated guess—and I 
explained that they were beyond my meager curative powers. He seemed resigned, but not particularly disappointed, 
and as he sat there cross-legged, naked except for the blanket wrapped around him, basking in the sun, the woman 
stood behind him and stroked his head. In a voice as if describing last year's weather she said, "Oh, when he was 
younger, he was beautiful and strong. Soon he will die." That night in my tent, sleepless and jealous of the Masai, I 
thought, "I'll take your malaria and parasites, I'll take your appalling infant mortality rates, I'll take the chances of 
being attacked by buffalo and lions. Just let me be as unafraid of dying as you are."
Maybe we will luck out and wind up as respected village elders. Perhap s we will grow old with grace and wisdom. 
Perhaps we will be honored, surrounded by strong, happy children whose health and fecundity will feel like 
immortality to us. Gerontologists studying the aging process find increasing evidence that mo st of us will age with a 
fair degree of success. There's far less  institutionalization and disability than one might have guessed. While the size 
of social networks shrink with age, the quality of the re lationships improves. There are types of cognitive skills that 
improve in old age (these are related to social intelligence and to making good strategic use of facts, rather than 
merely remembering them easily). The aver age elderly individual thinks his or he r health is above average, and takes 
pleasure from that. And mo st important, the average level of happiness increases in old age; fewer negative emotions 
occur and, when they do, they don't persist as long. Connected to this, brain-imaging studies show that negative 
images have less of an impact, and positive images have more of an impact on brain metabolism in older people, as 
compared to young.
So maybe old age is not so bad. The final chapter of this book reviews some of the patterns seen in aged people who 
are particularlyPage 126 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmsuccessful in their aging. The purpose of this chapter is to review what stress has to do with the aging process and 
whether we wind up with the honored village elder model of aging, or the cat food variant.
AGED ORGANISMS AND STRESS
How do aged organisms deal with stress? Not very well, it turns out. In many ways, aging can be defined as the progressive loss of the ability to deal with stress, and that  certainly fits our perception of  aged individuals as fragile 
and vulnerable. This can be stated more rigorously by saying that many aspects of the bodies and minds of old 
organisms work fine, just as they do in young ones, so long as they aren't pushed. Throw in  an exercise challenge, an 
injury or illness, time pressure, novelty—any of a variety of  physical, cognitive, or psyc hological stressors—and aged 
organisms don't do so well.
"Not doing so well" in the stress-response department can take at least two forms that should be familiar by now. The 
first is failing to activate a sufficient stress-response when it is needed. This occurs at many levels during aging. For 
example, individual cells have a variety of defenses they can mobilize in resp onse to a challenge th at can be viewed as 
a cellular stress-response. Heat a cell to  an unhealthy extent and "heat shock prot eins" are synthesized to help stabilize 
cellular function during a crisis. Damage DNA and DNA re pair enzymes are activated. Generate oxygen radicals and 
antioxidant enzymes are made in res ponse. And all of these cellular stress -responses become less responsive to 
challenge during aging.
A similar theme comes through at the le vel of how whole organ systems respond to stress. For example, after you 
eliminate from your study elderly people who have heart disease and look only at healthy subjects of different ages 
(so as to study aging, instead of inadvertently studying disease), many aspects of car diac function are unchanged by 
age. But challenge the system with exer cise, for example, and old hearts do not respond as adequately as do young 
ones, in that the maximal work capacity and the maximal heart rate that can be achieved are nowhere near as great as 
in a young person.* Similarly, in
* The problem here is not that elderly individuals fail to secret e sufficient epinephrine or nore pinephrine during exercise. Th ey secrete plenty, more 
than young individuals, in fact. But the heart and various blood vessels in an aged organism do not respond as vigorously to th e epinephrine and 
norepinephrine.
the absence of stress, old and young rat brains contain roughly the same amount of energy But when you stress the 
system by cutting off the flow of oxygen and nutrients, energy levels decline faster in the old brains.. Or, as a classic 
example, normal body temperature, 98.6 degrees, does not chan ge with age. Nevertheless, ag ed bodies are impaired in 
mounting a thermoregulatory stress-response, and thus it takes the bodies of the elderly longer to restore a normal 
temperature after being warmed or chilled.
The idea also applies to measures of cognition. What happens to IQ test scores as people get older? (You'll notice that 
I didn't say "intelligence." What that has to do with IQ test scores is a controversy I don't want to touch.) The dogma Page 127 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmin the field was once that IQ declined wi th age. Then it was that it did not decline. It depends on how you test it. If 
you test young and old people and give them lots of time to  complete the test, there is little difference. As you stress 
the system—in this case, by making the subjects race against a time limit—score s fall for all ages, but much further 
among older people.
So sometimes the problem in aging is not enough of a stress-r esponse. Predictably, in some realms, the problem is too 
much of a stress-response—either one tu rned on all the time, or one that takes too long to turn off at the end of a 
stressor.
As an example, older individuals are im paired at turning off epinephrine, norepinephrine, or glucocorticoid secretion 
after a stressor has finished; it takes longer for levels of th ese substances to return to ba seline. Moreover, even in the 
absence of the stressor, epinephrine, no repinephrine, and glucocorticoid levels are typically elevated in aged rats, 
nonhuman primates, and humans as well.*
Do aged organisms pay a price for having these components of the stress-response turned on too often? This seems to 
be the case. As one example, which wa s discussed in the chapter on memory, stress and glucocorticoids inhibit the 
birth of new neurons in the adult hippocampus and inhibit the growth of new processes in preexisting neurons. Is the 
birth of new neurons and the elaboration of neuronal proce sses preferentially inhibited in old rats? Yes, and if their 
gluco-
* The literature used to show th at resting glucocorticoid levels did not rise with  age in humans. However,  those studies came f rom a time when 
someone age sixty would be classified as "e lderly." Modern gerontologists do not cons ider someone aged un til the late seventies  or eighties, and 
more recent studies show a big jump in res ting glucocorticoid levels in that age group.
corticoid levels are lowered, neurogenesis and pro cess growth increase to leve ls seen in young animals.
We know by now that, ideally, the hormones of the stress-response should be nice and quiet when nothing bad is 
happening, secreted in tiny amounts. When a stressful emergency hits, your body needs a huge and fast stress-
response. At the end of the stressor, ev erything should shut off immediately. And these traits are precisely what old 
organisms typically lack.*
WHY YOU SELDOM SEE REALLY OLD SALMON
We shift over to the other half of the aging-stress relatio nship—not whether aged organisms can deal well with stress, 
but whether stress can accelerate aspects of  aging. There is some decent evidence that an excess of stress can increase 
the risk of some of the diseases of ag ing. Remarkably, it turns out that in mo re than a dozen speci es, glucocorticoid 
excess is the cause of death during aging.
Pictures of heroic wild anim als, a la Marlin Perkins: penguins who stan d all winter amid the Antarctic cold, keeping 
their eggs warm at their feet. Leopards dragging massive kills up trees with thei r teeth, in order to eat them free of 
harassment by lions. Desiccated camels marching scores of miles. And then there's salm on, leaping over dams and 
waterfalls to return to the freshwater stream of their birth. Wher e they spawn a zillion eggs. After which most of them 
die over the next few weeks.
Why do salmon die so soon after spawning? No one is quite sure, but evolutionary biologists are rife with theories 
about why this and the rare other cases of "programmed die-offs" in the animal kingdom may make some 
evolutionary sense. What is known, however, is the proximal mechanism underlying the sudden die-off (not "How 
come they die, in terms of evolutionary  patterns over the millennia?" but "How come they die, in the sense of which 
parts of the body's functioning suddenly go crazy?"). It is glucocorticoid secretion.
* Aging also brings about a dramatic declin e in the levels of a hormon e called DHEA, which has gotten tons of atte ntion. There is some evidence 
that DHEA serves as an "anti-stress" hormo ne, blocking the actions of glucocorticoids, and that it can have some beneficial eff ects in aged 
populations. I've buried DHEA in this footnot e, however, because the subject is quite co ntroversial and in need of some more co nvincing studies, in 
my view.Page 128 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA male sockeye salmon, after the onset of programmed aging.
If you catch salmon right after they spawn, just when they are looking a little green around the gills, you find they 
have huge adrenal glands, peptic ulcers, and kidney lesion s; their immune systems have  collapsed, and they are 
teeming with parasites and infections. Aha, kind of sounds like Selye's rats way back when.* Moreover, the salmon 
have stupendously high glucocorticoid concentrations in their bloodstreams. When salmon spawn, regulation of their 
glucocorticoid secretion break s down. Basically, the brain loses its ability  to measure accurately the quantities of 
circulating hormones and keeps sending a si gnal to the adrenals to secrete more of them. Lots of glucocorticoids can 
certainly bring about all those diseases with which the salmon are festering. But is the glucocorticoid excess really 
responsible for their death? Yup. Take a salmon right after spawning, remove its adrenals, and it will live for a year 
afterward.
The bizarre thing is that this sequence of events not only occurs  in five species of salm on, but also among a dozen 
species of Australian marsupial mice. All the male mice of these species die shortly afte r seasonal mating; cut out 
their adrenal glands, however, and they to o keep living. Pacific salmon and mars upial mice are not cl ose relatives. At 
least twice in evolutionary histor y, completely independently, two
* As a very weird and provocative observation, these salmon even have deposits in their brains of the "beta-amyloid" protein th at is found in the 
brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. No  one is quite sure what to make of that.
very different sets of species have come up with the identical trick: if you want  to degenerate very fast, secrete a ton 
of glucocorticoids.
CHRONIC STRESS AND THE AGING PROCESS IN THE MAINSTREAM
That is all fine for the salmon looking for the fountain of youth, but we and most other mammals age gradually over 
time, not in catastrophic die-offs over the course of days. Does stress influence the rate of gradual mammalian aging?
Intuitively, the idea that stress accelerates  the aging process makes sense. We recognize that there is a connection 
between how we live and how we die. Around 1900, a madly inspired German physiologist, Max Rubner, tried to 
define this connection scientifically. He looked at all sort s of different domestic species  and calculated things like 
lifetime number of heartbeats and lifetime metabolic rate ( not the sort of study that many scientists have tried to 
replicate). He concluded that there is only so long a body can go on—only so many breaths, so many heartbeats, so 
much metabolism that each pound of fl esh can carry out before the mechanis ms of life wear out. A rat, with 
approximately 400 heartbeats a minute, us es up its heartbeat allotm ent faster (after approxim ately two years) than an 
elephant (with approximately 35 beats per minute and a sixty-year life span). Such calculations lay behind ideas about 
why some species lived far longer than others. Soon the same sort of thinking was applied to how long different 
individuals within a species live—if you squander a lot of your heartbeats being nervous about blind dates when 
you're sixteen, there would be that much less metabolic reserve available to you at eighty.
In general, Rubner's ideas about life spans among different sp ecies have not held up well in their strictest versions, 
while the "rate of living" hypotheses about individuals within  a species that his ideas in spired have been even less 
tenable. Nevertheless, they led many people in the field to suggest that a lot of environmental perturbations can wear 
out the system prematurely. Su ch "wear and tear" thinking fit in naturally with the stress concept. As we have seen, 
excessive stress increases the risks of  adult-onset diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, 
reproductive decline, and immune suppression. All of thes e conditions become more comm on as we age. Moreover, 
in chapter 4 it was shown that if you have a lot of the indi ces of allostatic load, it increases your risk of Metabolic 
syndrome; that same study showed that it  increased your mort ality risk as well.Page 129 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWe return to the tendency of very old rats, humans, and primat es to have elevated resting levels of glucocorticoids in 
the bloodstream. Some aspect of the regu lation of normal glucocorticoid secretion is disrupted during aging. To get a 
sense of why this happens, we must return to chapter l's interest about why the water tank on your toilet does not 
overflow when it's refilling. Once ag ain, the process of refilling can trigger a sensor—the flotation device—to 
decrease the amount of water flowing in to the tank. Engineers who study this sort of thing term that process negative 
feedback inhibition or end-product inhibition: increasing amounts of water accumul ating in the tank decrease the 
likelihood of further release of water.
Most hormonal systems, including the CRH/ACTH/glucocorticoid axis, work by this feedback-inhibition process. The 
brain triggers glucocorticoid release indirectly via CRH and pituitary release of ACTH. The brain needs to know 
whether to keep secreting more CRH. It does this by sensing the levels of glucocorticoids in the circulation (sampling 
the hormone from the bloodstream coursing through the brain) to see if levels  are at, below, or above a "set point." If 
levels are low, the brain keeps secr eting CRH—just as when water levels in the toilet tank are still low. Once 
glucocorticoid levels reach or  exceed that set point, there is a negative feedback signal and th e brain stops secreting 
CRH. As a fascinating complicati on, the set point can shift. In  the absence of stress, the br ain wants different levels of 
glucocorticoids in the bloodstream from those required when  something stressful is happen ing. (This implies that the 
quantity of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream necessary to  turn off CRH secretion by the brain should vary with 
different situations, which turns out to be the case.)
This is how the system works normally, as can be shown experimentally by injecting a person with a massive dose of 
a synthetic glucocorticoid (dexamethasone ). The brain senses the sudden increase and says, in effect, "My God, I don't 
know what is going on with those idiots in the adrenal, but they just secreted way too many glucocorticoids." The 
dexamethasone exerts a negative feedback signal, and soon the person has stopped secreting CRH, ACTH, and her 
own glucocorticoids. This person would be characteri zed as "dexamethasone-respon sive." If negative feedback 
regulation is not working very well, however, the pers on is "dexamethasone-resistant"—she keeps secreting the 
various hormones, despite the whopping glucocorticoid signal in the bloodstream. And that is precisely what happens 
in old people, old nonhuman primates, and old rats. Glucocorticoid feedback regulation no longer works very well.
This may explain why very old organisms secrete excessive glucocorticoids (in the absen ce of stress and during the 
recovery period after the end of a stressor). Why the failure of feedback regulation? There is a fair amount of evidence 
that it is due to the degeneration during aging of one pa rt of the brain. The entire  brain does not serve as a 
"glucocorticoid sensor"; instead, that role is served by only a few ar eas with very high numbers of receptors for 
glucocorticoids and the means to tell the hypothalamus whether or not to secret e CRH. In chapter 10, I described how 
the hippocampus is famed for its role in learning and memory. As it turns out, it is also one of the important negative 
feedback sites in the brain for controlling glucocorticoid secretion. It also turns out that during aging, hippocampal 
neurons may become dysfunctional. When this occurs, some  of the deleterious conseque nces include a tendency to 
secrete an excessive amount of glucocorticoids—this coul d be the reason aged people may have elevated resting 
levels of the hormone, may have trouble turning off secretion after the end of stress, or may be dexamethasone-
resistant. It is as if one of the brak es on the system has been damaged, and ho rmone secretion rushes  forward, a little 
out of control.
The elevated glucocorticoid levels of ol d age, therefore, arise because of a pr oblem with feedback regulation in the 
damaged hippocampus. Why are neurons damaged in the aging hippocampus? It's glucocorticoid exposure, as was 
discussed in chapter 10.
If you've read carefully, you will begin to note somethin g truly insidious embedded in these findings. When the 
hippocampus is damaged, the rat secretes more glucocorti coids. Which should damage the hippocampus further. 
Which should cause even more glucocor ticoid secretion.... Each makes the other worse, causing a degenerative 
cascade that appears to occur in many aging rats, and whose potential pathological consequences have been detailed 
throughout virtually every page of this book.
Does this degenerative cascade occur in humans? As noted, glucocorticoid levels rise with extreme old age in the 
human, and chapter 10 outlines the first evidence that these hormones might have some bad effects on the human 
hippocampus. The primate and human hippocampus appear to be negative feedback regulators of glucocorticoid 
release, such that hippocampal damage is  associated with glucocorti coid excess, just as in th e rodent. So the pieces of 
the cascade appear to be there in the human , raising the possibilities that histories of severe stress, or of heavy use of 
synthetic glucocorticoids to treat some dis ease, might accelerate as pects of this cascade.Page 130 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmGeorge Segal, Man in a Chair, wood and plaster, 1969.
Does that mean that all is lost, that th is sort of dysfunction is an obligatory part of aging? Certainly not. It was not by 
chance that two paragraphs above, I desc ribed this cascade as occurring in "man y" aging rats, rather than in "all." 
Some rats age successfully in a way that  spares them this cascade, as do many  humans—these pleasing stories are part 
of the final chapter of this book.
It is thus not yet clear whether the "glucocorticoid neurotoxicity" story applies to how our brains age. Unfortunately, 
the answer is not likely to be availabl e for years; the subject is difficult to study in humans. Nevertheless, from what 
we know about this process in the rat and monkey, glucocorticoid toxicity stands  as a striking example of ways in 
which stress can accelerate aging. Should it turn out to apply to us as well, it  will be an aspect of  our aging that will 
harbor a special threat. If we ar e crippled by an accide nt, if we lose our si ght or hearing, if we  are so weakened by 
heart disease as to be bed-bound, we ceas e having so many of the things that make our lives worth living. But when it 
is our brains that are damaged, when it is our ability to recall
old memories or to form new ones that is destroyed, we fear we'll cease to exist as sentient, unique individuals—the 
version of aging that haunts us most.
Even the most stoic of readers should be  pretty frazzled by now, given the detai ling in the twelve chapters so far about 
the sheer number of things that can go wrong with stress. It is time to shift to the second half of the book, which 
examines stress management, coping, and individual differences  in the stress-response. It is time to begin to get some 
good news.
13
WHY IS PSYCHOLOGICAL  STRESS STRESSFUL?
Some people are born to biology. You can spot them instantly as kids—they're the ones comfortably lugging
around the toy microscopes, dissecting some dead animal
on the dining room table, being ostracized at school for
their obsession with geckos.* But all sorts of folks migrate to biology from other fields—chemists, psychologists, 
physicists, mathematicians.Page 131 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSeveral decades after stress physiology began, the discipline was inundated by  people who had spen t their formative 
years as engineers. Like physiologists, they thought there was a ferocious logic to how the body worked, but for 
bioengineers, that tended to mean viewing the body a bit like the circuitry diagram that you get with a radio: input-
output ratios, impedance, feedback lo ops, servomechanisms. I shudder even to write such words, as I barely 
understand them; but the bioengineers did wonders for the field, adding a tremendous vigor.
Suppose you wonder how the brain knows when to stop glucocorticoid secretion—when enough is enough. In a vague 
sort of way,
* I used to collect the leftover chicken bo nes from everyone at the Frid ay-night dinner table, clean them with my knife, and pr oudly display an 
articulated skeleton by the end of dessert. In retrospect, I think this was more to irr itate my sister than to begin an anatomi cal quest. A biography of 
Teddy Roosevelt, however, recently helped me  to appreciate that the worl d lost one of its great pote ntial zoologists when he la psed into politics. At 
age eighteen, he had already published professi onally in ornithology; when he was half that age, he reacted to the news that hi s mother had thrown 
out his collection of field mice, stored in the family icebox, by moping around the house, proclaiming, "The loss to science! T he loss to science!"
everyone knew that somehow the brain must be able to measure the amount of glucocorticoids in the circulation, 
compare that to some desired set point, and then decide wh ether to continue secreting CRH or turn off the faucet 
(returning to the toilet tank model). The bioengi-neers came in and showed that th e process was vastly more 
interesting and complicated th an anyone had imagined. There are "multiple feedback domain s"; some of the time the 
brain measures the quantity of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream, and sometimes the rate at which the level is 
changing. The bioengineers solved another critical issue: Is the stress-response linear or all-or-not hing? Epinephrine, 
glucocorticoids, prolactin, and other substa nces are all secreted during stress; but are they secreted to the same extent 
regardless of the intensity of the stressor (all-or-nothing responsiveness)? The system turns out to be incredibly 
sensitive to the size of the stressor, demonstrating a linear re lationship between, for example,  the extent of the drop in 
blood pressure and the extent of epinephrine secretion, between the degree of hypoglycemia (drop in blood sugar) and 
glucagon release. The body not only can sense something stressful, but it also is amazingly accurate at measuring just 
how far and how fast that stressor is throwing the body out of allostatic balance.
Beautiful stuff, and important. Hans Selye loved the bioeng ineers, which makes perfect sense, since in his time the 
whole stress field must have still s eemed a bit soft-headed to some mainst ream physiologists. Those physiologists 
knew that the body does one set of things when it is too co ld, and a diametrically opposite set when it is too hot, but 
here were Selye and his crew insisting that there were physiological mechanisms that respond equally to cold and hot? 
And to injury and hypoglycemia and hypotension? The beleaguered stress experts welcomed the bioengineers with 
open arms. "You see, it's for real; you can do math about stress, construct flow charts, feedback loop s, formulas. ..." 
Golden days for the business. If the system was turning out to be far more complicated th an ever anticipated, it was 
complicated in a way that was precise, l ogical, mechanistic. Soon it would be possible to model the body as one big 
input-output relationship: you tell me exactly to what degree a stressor impinges on an organism (how much it 
disrupts the allostasis of blood sugar, fluid volume, optim al temperature, and so on), and I'll tell you exactly how 
much of a stress-response will occur.
This approach, fine for most of the gr ound that we've covered up until now, wi ll probably allow us to estimate quite 
accurately what the pancreas of that zebra  is doing when the organism is sprintin g from a lion. But th e approach is not 
going to tell us which of us will get an
ulcer when the factory closes down. Starring in the late 1950s, a new style of experiments in stress physiology began 
to be conducted that burst th at lucid, mechanistic bioengin eering bubble. A single example will suffice. An organism 
is subjected to a painful stimulus, and you are interested in how great a stress-response will be triggered. The bio-
engineers had been all over that one, mapping the relations hip between the intensity and duration of the stimulus and 
the response. But this time, when the painful stimulus o ccurs, the organism under stu dy can reach out for its mommy 
and cry in her arms. Under these circumstances, this organism shows less of a stress-response.
Nothing in that clean, mechan istic world of the bioengineers could explain this phenomenon. The input was still the 
same; the same number of pain receptors  should have been firing while the child underwent some painful procedure. 
Yet the output was completely different. A critical r ealization roared through the resear ch community: the 
physiological stress-response can be modulated by psychologica l factors. Two iden tical stressors with the same extent 
of allostatic disruption can be perceived, can be appraised differently, and the whole show changes from there.
Suddenly the stress-response could be made bigger or smaller, depending on psychological factors. In other words, 
psychological variables could modulate the stress-response. Inevitably, the next  step was demonstrated: in the absence 
of any change in physiological reality—any actual disrup tion of allostasis—psycholog ical variables alone could 
trigger the stress-response. Flushed with excitement, Yale p hysiologist John Mason, one of the leaders in this 
approach, even went so far as to proclaim that all stress-responses were psychological stress-responses.
The old guard was not amused. Just wh en the conception of stress was beco ming systematized, rigorous, credible, 
along came this rabble of psychologists muddying up the picture. In a series of published exchanges in which they 
first praised each other's achievements and ancestors, Sely e and Mason attempted to shred each other's work. Mason Page 132 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmsmugly pointed to the growing literature on psychological initiation and modulation of the stress-response. Selye, 
facing defeat, insisted that all stress-responses couldn't be psychological and perceptual: if an organism is 
anesthetized, it still gets a stress-res ponse when a surgical incision is made.
The psychologists succeeded in getting a place at the table, and as they have acquired some table manners and a few 
gray hairs, they have been treated less like barbarians. We now have to consider which psychological variables are 
critical. Why is psycho logical stress stressful?
THE BUILDING BLOCKS 0F PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESSORS
Outlets for frustration You would expect key psychological variables to be mushy concepts to uncover, but in a 
series of elegant experiments, the physiologist Jay Weiss, then at Rockefeller University , demonstrated exactly what 
is involved. The subject of one experiment  is a rat that receives mild electric sh ocks (roughly equivalent to the static 
shock you might get from scuffing your foot on a carpet). Over a series of these, the rat develops a prolonged stress-
response: its heart rate and glucocorticoid secretion rate go  up, for example. For convenie nce, we can express the long
-term consequences by how likely the rat is to get an ulcer, a nd in this situation, the probability soars. In the next 
room, a different rat gets the same series of shocks—identical  pattern and intensity; its allostatic balance is challenged 
to exactly the same extent. But this time, whenever the rat gets a shock, it can run over to a bar of wood and gnaw on 
it. The rat in this situation is far less likely to get an ulcer. You have given it an outlet for frustration. Other types of 
outlets work as well—let the stressed rat eat something, drin k water, or sprint on a running wheel, and it is less likely 
to develop an ulcer.
We humans also deal better with stressors when we have outlets for frustration—punch a wall, take a run, find solace 
in a hobby. We are ev en cerebral enough to imagine those outlets and derive some relief: consider the prisoner of war 
who spends hours imagining a golf game in tremendous detail. I have a friend who passed a prolonged and very 
stressful illness lying in bed with a mechanical pencil and a notepad, drawing topographic maps of imaginary 
mountain ranges and taking hikes through them.
A central feature of an outlet bei ng effective is if it distracts from the stressor. But, obviously, more important is that it 
also be something positive for you—a re minder that there is more to life th an whatever is ma king you crazed and 
stressed at the time. The frus tration-reducing effects of ex ercise provide an additional layer of benefit, one harking 
back to my dichotomy, repeated ad nauseam, between the zebra running for it s life and the psychologically stressed 
human. The stress-response is about preparing your body for an explosive burst of energy consumption right now; 
psychological stress is about doing all the same things to your body for no physical reason whatsoever. Exercise 
finally provides your body for the outlet that it was preparing for.
A variant of Weiss's experiment uncovers a special feature of  the outlet-for-frustration r eaction. This time, when the 
rat gets the identical series of electric shocks  and is upset, it can run across the cage, sit
next to another rat and ... bite the hell out of it. Stress- induced displacement of  aggression: the pr actice works wonders 
at minimizing the stressfulness of a stressor. It's a real primate specialty as well. A male baboon loses a fight. 
Frustrated, he spins around and attack s a subordinate male who was minding his own business. An extremely high 
percentage of primate aggression represen ts frustration displaced on to innocent bysta nders. Humans are pretty good at 
it, too, and we have a technical way of describing the phen omenon in the contex t of stress-related disease: "He's one 
of those guys who doesn't get ulcers, he gives them." Taking it out on someone else—how well it works at minimizing 
the impact of a stressor.
Social support An additional way we can interact wi th another organism to minimize th e impact of a stressor on us is 
considerably more encouragi ng for the future of our planet than is di splacement aggression. Rats only occasionally 
use it, but primates are great at it. Put a primate through something unpleasant: it gets a stress-response. Put it through 
the same stressor while in a room full of  other primates and ... it depends. If those primates are strangers, the stress-
response gets worse. But if they are friends, the stress-re sponse is decreased. Social support networks—it helps to 
have a shoulder to cry on, a hand to hold, an ear to listen to you, someone to cradle you and to tell you it will be okay.
The same is seen with primates in the wild. While I most ly do laboratory research on how stress and glucocorticoids 
affect the brain, I spend my summers in Kenya studying patterns of stress-related physiology and disease among wild 
baboons living in a national park. The social life of a male baboon can be pretty stressful—you get beaten up as a 
victim of displaced aggression; you carefu lly search for some tuber to eat and clean  it off, only to have it stolen by 
someone of higher rank; and so on. Glucocorticoid levels are elevated among low-ranking baboons and among the 
entire group if the dominance hierarchy is unstable, or if a new aggressive male has just joined the troop. But if you 
are a male baboon with a lot of friends, you are likely to have lower glucocorticoid concentrations than males of the same general rank who lack these outlets. And what counts as friends? You play with kids, have frequent nonsexual 
grooming bouts with females (and social grooming in nonhuman primates lowers blood pressure).Page 133 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSocial support is certainly protective fo r humans as well. This can be demonstr ated even in transient instances of 
support. In a number of subtle studies, subjects were expose d to a stressor such as having to give a public speech or 
perform a mental arithmetic task, or having
George Tooker, Landscape with Figures, egg tempera on gesso, 1966.
two strangers argue with them, with or wi thout a supportive friend pres ent. In each case, social  support translated into 
less of a cardiovascular stress-response. Profound and persiste nt differences in degrees of social support can influence 
human physiology as well: within the same family, th ere are significantly higher glucocorticoid levels among 
stepchildren than among biologi cal children. Or, as an other example, among women with metastatic breast cancer, the 
more social support, the lower the resting Cortisol levels.
As noted in chapter 8, people with spouses or close friend s have longer life expectanci es. When the spouse dies, the 
risk of dying rises. Recall also from that  chapter the study of parents of Israeli soldiers killed in the Lebanon war: in 
the aftermath of this stressor, there wa s no notable increase in risk of diseas es or mortality, except among those who 
were already divorced or widowed. So me additional examples concern the cardiovascular system. People who are 
socially isolated have overly active sy mpathetic nervous systems. Given the likelihood that this will lead to higher 
blood pressure and more platel et aggregation in thei r blood vessels (remember that fr om chapter 3?), they are more 
likely to have heart disease—two to five times as likely, as it
turns out. And once they have the heart disease, they are more likely to die at  a younger age. In a study of patients 
with severe coronary heart disease, Redford Williams of Duke University and colleagues found that half of those 
lacking social support were dead within  five years— a rate three times higher than was seen in patients who had a 
spouse or close friend, afte r controlling for the severi ty of the heart disease.*
Finally, support can exist at the broad community level (stay tuned for chapter 17). If you are a member of an ethnic 
minority, the fewer members there are of your group in your neighborhood, the higher your risks of mental illness, 
psychiatric hospitalization, and suicide.
Predictability Weiss's rat studies uncovered another variable modulating the stress-response. The rat gets the same 
pattern of electric shocks, but this time, just before  each shock, it hears a wa rning bell. Fewer ulcers. Predictability 
makes stressors less stressful. The rat with the warning gets  two pieces of information. It learns when something 
dreadful is about to happen. Th e rest of the time, it learns  that something dreadful is not about to happen. It can relax. 
The rat without a warning can always be a half-second away from the next shock. In effect, information that increases 
predictability tells you that there is bad news, but comforts  you that it's not going to be worse—you are going to get 
shocked soon, but it's never going to be sprung on you without warning.
We all know a human equivalent of this principle: you're in the dentist's chair, no novocaine, the dentist drilling away. 
Ten seconds ofPage 134 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* Recently, I learned about the protective e ffects of social support in an unexpected  way. A local TV station was doing a piece  on how stressful 
rush-hour traffic was, and I wound up giving them advice—turnin g this chapter into a 15-second sound bite . Somewhere along the way we 
stumbled onto the great idea of getting a certified Type-A individual (w e eventually found one through a local Type-A cardiolog y clinic) who did 
the commute each day and measuring his stress hormone levels before  and during a commute. The film crew would take some saliva samples from 
which glucocorticoid levels would be measur ed. Great. Get to the guy's house just befo re his commute, collect some spit in a te st tube. Then into 
traffic—with the film crew increasingly stre ssed by the worry that there wouldn't be any tie-ups. But soon the snarls began, bu mper to bumper. 
Then the second saliva sample was taken. Laboratory analysis, a nxious TV producers awaiting results. Baseline sample at home: h ighly elevated 
glucocorticoid levels. Rush-hour level: way down. Oh no. I'm convinced that the explanation for th e outcome of that unscientific experiment was 
the social support. For this guy, who Type-A's his way through ru sh hour each day, this was fabulous. A chance to be on televis ion, a bunch of 
people there with him to document what a stressful commute he e ndures, getting to feel he's the chosen representative of all Ty pe A's, their 
anointed. He apparently spent the entire ri de cheerfully pointing out how horrible it was, how much worse he's seen ("You think  this is bad?! This 
isn't bad. You should have been in Troy in '47."). He had a fabulous time. The punch line? Everyone should have a friendly film  crew in tow when 
they're stuck in traffic.
nerve-curling pain, some rinsing, five seconds of drilling, a pause while the dentist fumbles a bit, fifteen seconds of 
drilling, and so on. In one of th e pauses, frazzled and trying not to whimper, you gasp, "Almost done?"
"Hard to say," the dentist mumbles, returning to the interm ittent drilling. Think how grateful we are for the dentist 
who, instead, says, "Two more and we're done." The instant the second burst of drilling ends, down goes blood 
pressure. By being given news about the stressor to come, you are also implicitly being comforted by now knowing 
what stressors are not coming.
As another variant on the helpfulness of predictability, organi sms will eventually habituate to a stressor if it is applied 
over and over; it may knock physiological allostasis equally out of balance the umpteenth time that it happens, but it is 
a familiar, predictable stressor by then, and a smaller stress-response is triggere d. One classic demonstration involved 
men in the Norwegian military going through parachute training—as the process went from being hair-raisingly novel 
to something they could do in thei r sleep, their anticipatory stress-resp onse went from being gargantuan to 
nonexistent.
The power of loss of predictability as a psychological stressor  is shown in an elegant, subtle study. A rat is going 
about its business in its cage, and at m easured intervals the experimenter delive rs a piece of food down a chute into 
the cage; rat eats happily. This is called an intermittent reinforcement schedule. Now, change the pattern of food 
delivery so that the rat gets exactly the same total amount of food over the course of an hour, but at a random rate. The 
rat receives just as much reward, but le ss predictably, and up go gl ucocorticoid levels. There is not a single physically 
stressful thing going on in the rat's world. It's not hungry , pained, running for its life—nothing is out of allostatic 
balance. In the absence of any stressor, loss of predictability triggers a stress-response.
There are even circumstances in which a stress-response can be more likely to occur in someone despite the reality 
that the outside world is less stressful. Work by the zoologist John Wingfield of the University of Washington has 
shown an example of this with wild bi rds. Consider some species that migrat es between the Arctic and the tropics. 
Bird #1 is in the Arctic, where the te mperature averages 5 degrees  and where it is, indeed, 5 degrees outside that day. 
In contrast, Bird #2 is in the tropics,  where the average temperature is 80 de grees, but today it has dropped down to 
60. Who has the bigger stress-response? Amazingly, Bird #2. The point isn't that the temperature in the tropics is 55 
degrees warmer than in the Arctic (what kind of stressor would
that be?). It's that the temperature in the tr opics is 20 degrees colder than anticipated.
A human version of the same idea has been documented. Du ring the onset of the Nazi  blitzkrieg bombings of 
England, London was hit every night like clockwork. Lots of stress. In the suburbs the bombings were far more 
sporadic, occurring perhaps once a week . Fewer stressors, but much less pred ictability. There was a significant 
increase in the incidence of ulcers du ring that time. Who developed more ulcers? The suburban population. (As 
another measure of the import ance of unpredictability, by the third month of the bombing, ulcer rates in all the 
hospitals had dropped back to normal.)
Despite the similarity between the responses of humans and of  other animals to a lack of predictability, I suspect that 
there they are not identical, and in an important way. The warning of impending shocks to a rat has little effect on the 
size of the stress-response during the shocks; instead, allowing the rat to  feel more confid ent about when it doesn't 
have to worry reduces the rat's anticipatory stress-response  the rest of the time. Analogously, when the dentist says, 
"Only two more times and then we're done," it allows us to relax at the end of the second burst of drilling. But I 
suggest, although I cannot prove it, th at unlike the case for the rat, proper information will also lower our stress-
response during the pain. If you were told "only two times more" versus "only ten times more," wouldn't you use 
different mental strategies to try to cope? With either scenario, you would pull out the comforting thought of "only 
one more and then it's the last one" at different times; yo u would save your most distracting fantasy for a different 
point; you would try counting to zero from different numbers. Predictive information lets us know what internal 
coping strategy is likely to work best during a stressor.
We often wish for information about th e course of some medical problem becau se it aids our strategizing about how 
we will cope. A simple example: you have some minor surgery, and you're given predictive information—the first Page 135 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmpost-surgical day, there is going to be a lot of pain, pretty constant, whereas by the second day, you'll just feel a bit 
achy. Armed with that information, you are more likely to plan on watching the eight distracting videos on day one 
and to devote day two to writing delicate haikus than the other way around. Among other reasons, we wish to 
optimize our coping strategi es when we request the most devastating piece of medical information any of us will ever 
face: "How much time do I have left?"
Control Rat studies also demonstrate a related facet of psychological stress. Give the rat the same series of shocks. 
This time, however, you
study a rat that has been trained to pre ss a lever to avoid electric shocks. Take  away the lever, shock it, and the rat 
develops a massive stress-response. It's as if the rat were  thinking, "I can't believe this. I know what to do about 
electric shocks; give me a damned lever and I could handle this. This isn't fair." Ulceration city (as well as higher 
glucocorticoid levels, poorer immune function, and faster tumor growth). Give the trained rat a lever to press; even if 
it is disconnected from the shock mechanism, it still helps: down goes the stress-response. So long as the rat has been 
exposed to a higher rate of shocks previously, it will think that the lower rate now is due to its having control over the 
situation. This is an extraordinarily powerful variable in modulating the stress-response.
The identical style of experiment with humans yields similar results. Place two pe ople in adjoining rooms, and expose 
both to intermittent noxious, loud noises; the person who ha s a button and believes that pressing it decreases the 
likelihood of more noise is less hypertensive. In one variant on this experiment, subjects with the button who did not 
bother to press it did just as well as those who actually pressed the button. Thus, the exercise of control is not critical; 
rather, it is the belief that you have it. An everyday ex ample: airplanes are safer than car s, yet more of us are phobic 
about flying. Why? Because  your average driver be lieves that he is a better-than-avera ge driver, thus mo re in control. 
In an airplane, we have no control at all. My wife and I tease each other on pl ane flights, exchangi ng control: "Okay, 
you rest for a while, I'll take over concentrating on keeping the pilot from having a stroke."
The issue of control runs through the literature on the psychol ogy of stress. As will be discussed in the final chapter 
on coping, exercise can be a great st ress reducer, but only so long as it is something that seems even remotely 
desirable. Amazingly, the same is seen in a rat— let a rat run voluntarily in a running wheel, and it makes it feel great. 
Force a rat to do the same amount of exercise  and it gets a massive stress-response.
The issue of control runs through the extensive literature  on occupational stress. Sure , there are some jobs where 
stress comes in the form of someone having too much cont rol and responsibility—that rare occupation where, over the 
course of an average workday, you might find yourself having to direct the landing pattern of an array of circling 
jumbo jets at the local airport, pers onally excise someone's cerebral aneurysm , and make the final decision as to 
whether taffeta is going to be in at the fall runway show in Milan. For most, though, occupational stress is built more 
around lack of contro l, work life spent
as a piece of the machine. Endless stud ies have shown that the link between o ccupational stress and increased risk of 
cardiovascular and metabolic diseases is anchored in the killer combination of high demand and low control—you 
have to work hard, a lot is expected of you, and you have minimal control over the process. This is the epitome of the 
assembly line, the combination of stressors that makes for Marx's alienation of the work ers. The control element is 
more powerful than the demand one—low demand and low control is more damaging to one's health than high 
demand and high control.
The stressfulness of lack of control on the job applies in  only certain domains, however . For example, there is the 
issue of what product is made, and lack  of control in this realm tends not to be all that stressful—few people are 
ulcerating because of their deep convicti on that all of their capab le and motivated fellow wo rkers should be cranking 
vast numbers of stuffed Snoopys out of this factory instead of ball bearings. Instead, it is stress about lack of control 
over the process—what work rate is expected and how much  flexibility there is about it, what amenities there are and 
how much control you have over them, how authoritarian the authorities are.
These issues can apply just as readily to some less ex pected workplaces, ones that can be highly prestigious and 
desirable. For example, professional mu sicians in orchestras generally have lower job satisfaction and more stress 
than those in small chamber groups (suc h as a string quartet). Why? One pair of researchers suggest that this is 
because of the lack of autonom y in an orchestra, where centu ries of tradition hold that orchestras are subservient to 
the dictatorial whims of the maestro c onducting them. For ex ample, it was only in recent y ears that orchestra unions 
won the right for regularly scheduled bathroom breaks during rehearsals, instead of having to wait until the conductor 
cared to note how squirmy th e reed players had become.*
So the variable of control is extremel y important; controlling the rewards that you get can be more desirable than 
getting them for nothing. As an extraordinary example, both pigeons and rats prefer to press a lever in order to obtain 
food (so long as the task is not too difficult) over having  the food delivered freely—a th eme found in the activities and 
statements of many scions of great fortunes, who regret the contingency-free nature of their lives, without purpose or 
striving.Page 136 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* Interestingly, the paper was written by Se ymour Levine, one of the gian ts in this field, and his son, Robert, a professional orchestra musician.
Loss of control and lack of predictive  information are closely related. Some  researchers have emphasized this, 
pointing out that the common theme is that the organism  is subjected to novelty. You thought you knew how to 
manage things, you thought you knew what would happen next, and it turns out you are wrong in this novel situation. 
The potency of this is demonstrated in primate studies in which merely placing the animal into a novel cage 
suppresses its immune system. Others have emphasized that these types of stressors cause  arousal and vigilance, as 
you search for the new rules of control and prediction . Both views are different aspects of the same issue.
A perception of th ings worsening Yet another critical psychological variable in the stress-response has been 
uncovered. A hypothetical example: two rats get a series of electric shocks. On the first day, one gets ten shocks an 
hour; the other, fifty. Next day, both get twenty-five shoc ks an hour. Who becomes hypertensive? Obviously, the one 
going from ten to twen ty-five. The other rat is thin king, "Twenty-five? Piece of ch eese, no problem; I can handle 
that." Given the same degree of disruption of allostasis, a perception that events are improving helps tremendously.
The principle often pops up in the realm of human illness. R ecall in chapter 9 the scenario where pain is less stressful, 
can even be welcome, when it means, fo r example, that the drugs are working, the tumor is  shrinking. One classic 
study demonstrated that in examin ing parents of children who had a 25 percent chance of dying of cancer. 
Astonishingly, these parents showed only a moderate rise in glucocorticoid levels in the bloodstream. How could that 
be? Because the children were all in re mission after a period in which the odds  of death had been far higher. Twenty-
five percent must have seemed like a mi racle. Twenty-five shocks an hour, a certain degree of  social instability, a one-
in-four chance of your child dying—each can imply either good news or bad, and only the latter seems to stimulate a 
stress-response. It's not just the external reality; it's the meaning you attach to it.
A version of this can be observed among the baboons I stud y in Kenya. In general, wh en dominance hierarchies are 
unstable, resting glucocorticoid levels  rise. This makes sense, because such  instabilities make for stressful times. 
Looking at individual baboons, however, shows a more subtle pattern: given the same degree of instability, males 
whose ranks are dropping have elevated glucocorticoid leve ls, while males whose ranks are rising amid the tumult 
don't show this endocrine trait.
NOT SO FAST
Thus, some powerful psychological factors can trigger a stress-response on their own or make another stressor seem more stressful: loss of control or predictability, loss of out lets for frustration or sources of support, a perception that 
things are getting worse. There are obviously some overlaps in the meaning of these different factors. As we saw, 
control and predictability are closely aligned; combine them with a perception of things worsening, and you have the 
situation of bad things happening, out of your control, an d utterly unpredictable. The primatologist Joan Silk of 
UCLA has emphasized how, among primates , a great way to maintain dominance is for the alpha individual to mete 
out aggression in a randomly brutal way. This is our primate essence of terrorism.
Sometimes these different variables conf lict and it becomes a question as to which is more powerful. This often 
involves a dichotomy between control/predictability issues and the perception of whether things are improving or 
worsening. For example, someone unexpectedly wins the lotte ry big-time. Is this a stressor? It depends on what is 
more powerful, the beneficial "perception of things getting better" part or the stressful "lack of predictability" part. 
Not surprisingly, if the lottery win is big enough, most people's psyches can handle some unpredictability. 
Nonetheless, some nonhuman primate studies in which rank was manipulated by the experimenters show that it can 
go in the other way, that if the change is sufficiently une xpected, it can be stressful, ev en if it is good change (and 
psychotherapy often must delve into the reasons why people sometimes find change for the good to be less desirable 
than persisting with a known misery). Conversely, if a situat ion is sufficiently awful, the fact that it may have been 
predictable offers little comfort.
These factors play a major role in explaining how we all go through lives full of stressors, yet differ so dramatically in 
our vulnerability to them. The final chapter of this book ex amines the bases of these indi vidual differences in greater 
detail. This will serve as a blueprint for analyzing how to  learn to exploit these psyc hological variables—how, in 
effect, to manage stress better.
The ways in which these different psychological variables can  interact brings up a key point, one that will dominate 
the final chapter. This is that stress management cannot consist merely of the simple-minded solution of "Maximize 
control. Maximize predictability. Maximize outlets for fr ustration." As we will now see, it is considerablyPage 137 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmmore complicated than that. As  the most obvious first pass at this, some lack of control and predictability can be a 
great thing—a good roller-coaster ride, a superbly terrifying movie, a mystery novel with a great surprise ending, 
winning a lottery, being subject to a random act of kindness.  And sometimes, an overabundance of predictability is a 
disaster—boredom on the job. The right amounts of loss of control and predictability are what we call stimulation. In 
chapter 16, we will look at the biology of why stimulation makes us happy, rather than stressed. The goal is never to 
generate lives in which there is never a challenge to allo stasis. And the remainder of this chapter considers when 
increasing a sense of control and predictability reduces stress.
SOME SUBTLETIES OF PREDICTABILITY
We have already seen how predictability can ameliorate the consequences of stress:  one rat gets a series of shocks and 
develops a higher risk for an ulcer th an the rat who gets warnings beforehand. Predictability doesn't always help, 
however. The experimental literature on this is pretty dense; some human examples of this point make it more 
accessible. (Remember, in these scenarios, the stressor is inevitable; the warning cannot ch ange the stressor, just the 
perception of it.)
How predictable is the stressor, in the absence of a warning? What if, one morning, an omnipotent voice says, "There 
is no way out of it; a meteor is going to crush your car while you're at work today (but it's the only time it will happen 
this year)." Not soothing. There's the good news that it's not going to happen again tomorrow, but that's hardly 
comforting; this is not an event that you anxiously fret ov er often. At the other extrem e, what if one morning an 
omnipotent voice whispers, "Today it's going to be stressful  on the freeway—lots of traffi c, stops and go's. Tomorrow, 
too. In fact, every day this year, except November 9, when there'll hardly be any traffic, people will wave to each 
other, and a highway patrol cop will stop you in order to share his coffee cake with you." Who needs predictive 
information about the obvious fact that driving to work is going to be stressful? Thus, warnings are less effective for 
very rare stressors (you don't usually worry much about meteors) and very frequent ones (they approach being 
predictable even w ithout the warning).
How far in advance of the stre ssor does the warning come? Each day, you go for a mysterious appointment: you are 
led into a room with your eyes closed and are seated in a deep, comfortable chair.  Then, with roughly even 
probabilities but no warning, either a rich, avuncular voice reads you to sleep with your favorite childhood stories, or Page 138 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htma bucket of ice water is sloshed over your head. Not a pleasing prospect, I would bet. Would the whole thing be any 
less unsettling if you were told which treatment you were going to get five seconds before the event? Probably not—
there is not enough time to derive any psychological benefits from the information. At the other extreme, how about 
predictive information long in the future? Would you wish for an omnipotent voice to tell you, "Eleven years and 
twenty-seven days from now your ice-water bath will last te n full minutes"? Information either just before or long 
before the stressor does little good to alleviate the psychological anticipation.
Some types of predictive information can even increase the cumulative anticip atory stressor. For example, if the 
stressor is truly terrible. Would you be comforted by the omnipotent messa ge: "Tomorrow an unavoidable accident 
will mangle your left leg, although your right leg will remain in great shape"?
Likewise, predictive information can make things worse if the information is vague. As I write this section, we 
continue to be stressed by the madden ing vagueness of predictive information in our post-9/11 world, when we are 
given warnings that read like horoscopes from hell: "Orange Al ert: We don't know what the th reat is, but be extra alert 
about everything for the next few days."*
Collectively, these scenarios tell us that predictability does  not always work to protect us from stress. The much more 
systematic studies with animals suggest that it works only in a midrange of frequencies and intensities of stressors, 
and with certain lag times and levels of accurate information.
SUBTLETIES OF CONTROL
To understand some important subtleties of the effects of control on  stress, we need to return to the paradigm of the 
rat being shocked. It had been previously trained to press a lever to avoid shocks, and now it's pounding away like 
crazy on a lever. The lever does nothing; the rat is still get ting shocked, but with less ch ance of an ulcer because the 
rat thinks it has control. To introduce a sense of control into the experimental design decreases the stress-response 
because, in effect, the rat is thinking, "T en shocks an hour. Not bad; just imag ine how bad it would be if I wasn't on 
top of it with my lever here." But what if things backfire, and adding a sense of control makes the rat think, "Ten 
shocks an hour, what's wrong with me? I have a lever here, I should have avoided the shocks, it's my fault." If you 
believe you have control over stressors that are, in fact, beyond your control, you may consider it somehow to be your 
fault that the inevitable occurred.
* The satirical newspaper The Onion mocked the imprecision of this information with a f acetious article in which Tom Ridge, secretary of 
Homeland Security, supposedly announ ces new levels of alert. "The newly added levels are Orange-Red Alert, Red-Orange Alert, Ma roon Alert, 
Burnt Sienna Alert, and Ochre Alert," Ridge said. "They indicate, in ascending order of  fear: concern, deep dread, severe appre hension, near-
crippling fright, and pants-shitting terr or. Please make a note of this." (The Onion 39, no. 7,26 February 2003)
An inappropriate sense of control in the face of awful events can make us  feel terrible. So me of our most 
compassionate words to people experienci ng tragedy involve minimizing their perceived sense of control. "It's not 
your fault, no one could have stopped in time; she just darted out from between the cars." "It's not something you 
could have done anything about; you tried your best, the economy's just lousy now." "Honey, getting him the best 
doctor in the world couldn't have cured him." And some of the most brutally callous of society's attempts to shift 
blame attribute more personal control during a stressor than exists. "She was asking for it if she was going to dress 
that way" (rape victims have the cont rol to prevent the rape). "Your chil d's schizophrenia was caused by your 
mothering style" (this was a destruc tive belief that dominated psychiatry for decades before the disease was 
recognized to be neurochemical). "If they'd only made the effort to assimilate, they wouldn't have these 
problems" (minorities have the power to prevent their persecution).
The effects of the sense of control on st ress are highly dependent on context. In general, if the stressor is of a sort 
where it is easy to imagine how much worse it could have b een, inserting an artificial sense of control helps. "That 
was awful, but think of how bad it would have been if I ha dn't done X." But when the stressor is truly awful, an 
artificial sense of control is damaging—it is difficult to c onceive a yet-worse scenario th at you managed to avoid, but 
easy to be appalled by the disaster you didn't prevent. You don't want to feel as if you could have controlled the 
uncontrollable when the outcome is awful. People with a strong internal locus of control (in other words, people who 
think they are the masters of their ow n ship—that what goes on around them reflects their actions) have far greater 
stress-responses than do those with external loci when confronted with something uncontrollable. This is a particular 
risk for the elderly (especially  elderly men) as life generates more and more things beyond their control. As we will 
see in the final chapter, there is even  a personality type whose tendency to internalize co ntrol in the face of bad, 
uncontrollable things great ly increases the risk of a particular disease.
These subtleties about control and predictability help to explain a confusing feature about the studies of stress. In 
general, the less control or predictability, the more at ri sk you are for a stress-induced disease. Yet an experiment 
conducted by Joseph Brady in 1958 with monkeys gave rise to the view that more control and more predictability 
cause ulcers. Half the animals could press a bar to delay shocks ("executive" monkeys); the other half were passively 
yoked to one of the "executives" such that  they received a shoc k whenever the firstPage 139 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmone did. In this widely reported study, the executive monkey s were more likely to develop ulcers. Out of these studies 
came the popular concept of the "execu tive stress syndrome" and associated images of executi ve humans weighed 
down with the stressful burdens of control, leadership, and responsibility. Ben Natelson, of the VA Medical Center in 
East Orange, New Jersey, along with Jay Weiss, noted some problems with that study. First, it was conducted with 
parameters where control and predictability are bad news . Second, the "executive" and "nonexecutive" monkeys were 
not chosen randomly; instead, the monkeys that tended to pr ess the bar first in pilot studies were selected to be 
executives. Monkeys that press sooner have  since been shown to be more emotio nally reactive animals, so Brady was 
inadvertently stacking the execu tive side with the more reactive, ulcer-pro ne monkeys. In general, executives of all 
species are more likely to be givi ng ulcers than to be getting them , as we will see in chapter 17.
To summarize, stress-responses can be modulated or even caused by psychologi cal factors, including loss of outlets 
for frustration and of social support, a perception of things worsening, and under some circumstances, a loss of control 
and of predictability. These ideas have vastly expanded our ability to answer the question: Why do only some of us 
get stress-related diseases? Obviously we differ as to the nu mber of stressors that befall us. After all the chapters on 
physiology, you can guess that we differ in how fast our adrenals make glucocorticoids, how many insulin receptors 
we have in our fat cells, the thickness of our stomach walls, and so on. But in addition to those physiological 
differences, we can now add another dimension. We differ in the psychological filters through which we perceive the 
stressors in our world. Two people participating in the sa me event—a long wait at the supermarket checkout, public 
speaking, parachuting out of an airplane —may differ dramatically in their psychological percep tion of the event. "Oh, 
I'll just read a magazine while I wait" (outlet for frustration); "I'm nervous as hell, but by giving this after-dinner talk, 
I'm a shoo-in for that promotion" (things are getting better); "This is great—I've always wanted to try sky-diving" (this 
is something I'm in control of).
In the next two chapters we will cons ider psychiatric disorders such as de pression and anxiety, and personality 
disorders, in which there's a bad match between how stressful  the real world is and how st ressful the person perceives 
it to be. As we'll see, the mismat ch between the two can take a variet y of forms, but the thing in common
is the fact that a potentially considerable price is pa id by the sufferer. Following  that, in chapter 16, we 
consider what psychological stress has to do with the process of addict ion. Following that is a chapter 
examining how your place in society, and the type of  society it is, can have profound effects on stress 
physiology and patterns of disease. In the final ch apter we will examine how st ress-management techniques 
can aid us by teaching how to exploit these psychological defenses.
14
STRESS AND DEPRESSION
We are morbidly fascinated with the exotica of disease. They fill our ma de-for-television movies, our tabloids,
and the book reports of adolescents hoping to become doc-tors someday. Victorians with Elephant Man's disease,
murderers with multiple personality disorders, ten-year-old s with progeria, idiot savants with autism, cannibals with 
kuru. Who could resist? But when it come s to the bread and butter of human mise ry, try a major depression. It can be 
life-threatening, it can destroy lives, demolish the families of sufferers. And it is dizzyingly common—the 
psychologist Martin Seligman has called it the common cold of psychopathology. Best estimates are that from 5 to 20 
percent of us will suffer a major, incapacitating depression at some point in our lives, causing us to be hospitalized or 
medicated or nonfunctional for a signif icant length of time. Its incidence has been steadily  increasing for decades—by 
the year 2020, depression is projected to be the s econd leading cause of medi cal disability on earth.
This chapter differs a bit from those that preceded it in which the concept of "stress" was at the forefront. Initially, that 
may not seem to be the case in our focus on depression. Th e two appear to be inextricab ly linked, however, and the 
concept of stress will run through every page of this chapter. It is impossible to understand either the biology or 
psychology of major depressions without recognizing the critical role played in the disease by stress.
To begin to understand this connection, it  is necessary to get some sense of the disorder's characteristics. We have first 
to wrestle with a semantic problem. Depression is a term that we all use in an everyday sense. Something mildly or 
fairly upsetting happens to us, and we get
"the blues" for a while, followed by r ecovery. This is not what occurs in a ma jor depression. One is sue is chronicity—
for a major depression to be occurring, the symptoms to ha ve persisted for at least two weeks. The other is severity—Page 140 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthis is a vastly crippling disorder that leads people to attempt suicide; its victims may lose their jobs, family, and all 
social contact because they can not force themselves to get out  of bed, or refuse to go to a psychiatrist because they 
feel they don't deserve to get better. It is a horrific dis ease, and throughout this chapter I will be referring to this 
major, devastating form of depression, rather than the tr ansient blues that we may casually signify with the term 
"feeling depressed."
THE SYMPTOMS
The defining feature of a major depression is loss of pleasure. If I had to define a major depression in a single sentence, I would describe it as a "gen eric/neurochemical disord er requiring a strong environmental trigger whose 
characteristic manifestation is an inabi lity to appreciate sunsets." Depression can be as tragic as cancer or a spinal 
cord injury. Think about what our lives are about. None of us will live forever, and on occasion we actually believe it; 
our days are filled with disappointments, failures, unrequited loves. Despite this, almost inconceivably, we not only 
cope but even feel vast pleasures. I, for example, am resounding ly mediocre at soccer, but nothing keeps me from my 
twice-weekly game. Invariably there co mes a moment when I manage to gum up someone more adept than I; I'm 
panting and heaving and pleased, and th ere's still plenty more time to play and a breeze blows and I suddenly feel 
dizzy with gratitude for my animal existence. Wh at could be more tragic than a dis ease that, as its defining symptom, 
robs us of that capacity?
This trait is called anhedonia: hedonism is  "the pursuit of pleasure," anhedonia is "the inability to feel pleasure" (also 
often called dysphoria—I'll be using the terms interchang eably). Anhedonia is consistent among depressives. A 
woman has just received the long-sought  promotion; a man has just become engaged to the woman of his dreams—
and, amid their depression, they will tell you how they feel nothing, how it really doesn't count, how they don't 
deserve it. Friendship, achievement, sex,  food, humor—none can bring any pleasure.
This is the classic picture of depressi on, and some recent research, much of it  built around work of the psychologist 
Alex Zautra of the
George looker, Woman at the Wall, egg tempera on gesso, 1974.
University of Arizona, shows that the story is more co mplex. Specifically, positive an d negative emotions are not 
mere opposites. If you take subjects and, at random times throughout the day, have them record how they are feeling 
at that moment, the frequencies of f eeling good and feeling bad are not inve rsely correlated. Th ere's normally not 
much of a connection between how much your life is filled with strongly positive emotions and how much with 
strongly negative ones. Depression repr esents a state where those two independe nt axes tend toward collapsing into 
one inverse relationship—too few positive emotions and too many negative ones. Naturally, the inverse correlation 
isn't perfect, and a lot of current resear ch focuses on questions like: Are differ ent subtypes of depr ession characterized 
more by the absence of positive emotions or the overabundance of negatives?Page 141 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAccompanying major depression are great  grief and great guilt. We often f eel grief and guilt in the everyday 
sadnesses that we refer to as "depression." But in a major depression, they can be incap acitating, as the person is 
overwhelmed with the despai r. There can be complex
layers of these feelings: not just obsessive guilt, for exam ple, about something that has contributed to the depression, 
but obsessive guilt about the depression itself—what it has done to the sufferer's family, the guilt of not being able to 
overcome depression, a life lived but on ce and wasted amid this disease. Smal l wonder that, worl dwide, depression 
accounts for 800,000 suicides per year.*
In a subset of such patients, the sense of grief and guilt can take on the quality of a delusion. By this, I do not mean 
the thought-disordered delusions of schizophrenics; instead, delusional thinking in depressives is of the sort where 
facts are distorted, over- or underin-terpreted to the point wh ere one must conclude that th ings are terrible and getting 
worse, hopeless.
An example: a middle-aged man, out of the blue, has a major heart attack. Over whelmed by his implied mortality, the 
transformation of his life, he slips into a major depression. Despite this, he is recovering  from the attack reasonably 
well, and there is every chance that he will resume a normal life. But each day he's sure he's getting worse.
The hospital in which he is staying is circular in constructio n, with a corridor that forms a loop. One day, the nurses 
walk him once around the hospital before he collapses back in bed. The next day, he does two laps; he is getting 
stronger. That evening, when his family visits, he explains to them that he is sinking. "What are you talking about? 
The nurses said that you did two loops today; yesterday you only did one." No, no, he shakes his head sadly, you don't 
understand. He explains that the hospital is being renovated and, um, well, last night they closed off the old corridor 
and opened a newer, smaller one. And, yo u see, the distance around the new loop is less than half the distance of the 
old one, so two laps today is still less than I could do yesterday.
This particular incident occurred w ith the father of a friend, an engi neer who lucidly described radii and 
circumferences, expecting his family to believe that the hospital had opened up a new corridor through the core of the 
building in one day. This is delusional thinking; the emotional energies behind the analysis and evaluation are 
disordered so that the everyday world is interpreted in a way that leads to depressive conclusions—it's awful, getting 
worse, and this is what I deserve.
* Some suicide statistics: women are more lik ely to attempt suicide when depressed than  are men; men are mo re likely to be succ essful. The group 
most at risk are single white ma les over sixty-five years of ag e with, naturally, access to guns.
Cognitive therapists, like Aaron Beck of  the University of Pennsylvania, even consider depression to be primarily a 
disorder of thought, rather than emotion, in that sufferers tend to see the world in a dist orted, negative way. Beck and 
colleagues have conducted striking studie s that provide evidence for this. For ex ample, they might show a subject two 
pictures. In the first, a group of peopl e are gathered happily around a dinner ta ble, feasting. In the second, the same 
people are gathered around a coffin. S how the two pictures rapidly or simu ltaneously; which one is remembered? 
Depressives see the funeral scene at rate s higher than chance. They  are not only depressed about something, but see 
the goings-on around them in a distorted way that always re inforces that feeling. Their glasses are always half empty.
Another frequent feature of a major depression is called psychomotor retardation. The person moves and speaks 
slowly. Everything requires tremendous effort and concentra tion. She finds the act of me rely arranging a doctor's 
appointment exhausting. Soon it is too much even to get out of bed and get dressed. (It should be noted that not all 
depressives show psychomotor retardation; some may show the opposite pattern, termed psychomotor agitation.) The 
psychomotor retardation accounts for one of the important cl inical features of depressi on, which is that severely, 
profoundly depressed people rarely attempt suicide. It's not until they begin to feel a bit better. If the psychomotor 
aspects make it too much for this person to get out of bed, they sure aren't going to find the often considerable energy 
needed to kill themselves.
A key point: many of us tend to think of depressives as people who get the same everyday blahs as you and I, but that 
for them it just spirals out of control. We may also have the sense, whispered out of ears hot, that these are people who 
just can't handle normal ups and downs, who are indulging th emselves. (Why can't they just  get themselves together?) 
A major depression, however, is as real a disease as diabetes. Another set of de pressive symptoms su pports that view. 
Basically, many things in the bodies of depressives work  peculiarly; these are called vegetative symptoms. You and I 
get an everyday depression. Wh at do we do? Typically, we sleep more than  usual, probably eat more than usual, 
convinced in some way that such  comforts will make us feel better. These tr aits are just the opposite of the vegetative 
symptoms seen in most people with ma jor depressions. Eating decl ines. Sleeping does as we ll, and in a distinctive 
manner. While depressives don't necessarily have trouble falling asleep, they have the problem of "early morning 
wakening," spending months onPage 142 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmend sleepless and exhausted from three-th irty or so each mo rning. Not only is sleep s hortened but, as mentioned in 
chapter 11, the "architecture" of sleep is different as well —the normal pattern of shifting between deep and shallow 
sleep, the rhythm of the onset of dream states, are disturbed.
An additional vegetative symptom is extremely relevant to this chapter, namely that major depressives often 
experience elevated levels of glucocorticoids. This is cri tical for a number of reasons that will be returned to, and 
helps to clarify what the diseas e is actually about. When looking at a depressi ve sitting on the edge of the bed, barely 
able to move, it is easy to think of the person as energy-less, enervated. A more accurate picture is of the depressive as 
a tightly coiled spool of wire, tense, straining, active—bu t all inside. As we will see,  a psycho-dynamic view of 
depression shows the person fighting an enormous, aggressive mental battle—no wonder they have elevated levels of 
stress hormones.
Chapter 10 reviewed how glucocorticoids can impair aspects of memory that depend on the hippocampus, and the 
frequently elevated glucocorticoid levels in depression ma y help explain another feature of the disease, which is 
problems with hippocampal-dependent memory. The memory problems may reflect, in part, a lack of motivation on 
the part of the depressed person (why work hard on some shrink's memory test when everything, everything, is 
hopeless and pointless?), or an anhedonic inability to respond to the rewards of remembering something in a task. 
Nonetheless, amid those additional f actors, the pure process of storing and retrieving memories via the hippocampus 
is often impaired. As we'll s ee shortly, this fits extraordin arily well with recent findings  showing that the hippocampus 
is smaller than average in many depressives.
Another feature of depression also confirms  that it is a real disease, rather th an merely the situation of someone who 
simply cannot handle everyday ups and downs. There are multiple types of depressions, and they can look quite 
different. In one variant, unipolar de pression, the sufferer fluc tuates from feeling extrem ely depressed to feeling 
reasonably normal. In another form, the person fluctu ates between deep depressi on and wild, disorganized 
hyperactivity. This is called bipolar depression or, more  familiarly, manic depression. Here we run into another 
complication because, just as we use depr ession in an everyday sense that is different from the medical sense, mania 
has an everyday connotation as well. We may use the term to refer to madness, as in made-for-tel evision homicidal 
maniacs. Or we could describe someone as being in a manic state when he is buoyed by some
unexpected good news—talking quickly, laughing, gesticul ating. But the mania found in manic depression is of a 
completely different magnitude. Let me give an example of the disorder: a woman comes into the emergency room; 
she's bipolar, completely manic, hasn't been taking her medication. She's on welfare, doesn't have a cent to her name, 
and in the last week she's bought thr ee Cadillacs with money from loan sharks . And, get this, she doesn't even know 
how to drive. People in manic states will go for days on thr ee hours of sleep a night and feel rested, will talk nonstop 
for hours at a time, will be vastly distractible, unable to  concentrate amid their raci ng thoughts. In outbursts of 
irrational grandiosity, they will behave in ways that are foolhardy or dangerous to themselves and others—at the 
extreme, poisoning themse lves in attempting to prove their immortality, burning down their homes, giving away their 
life savings to strangers. It is  a profoundly destructive disease.
The strikingly different subtypes of depression and their variability suggest not just a single disease, but a 
heterogeneity of diseases that have different underlying biologies. Another feature of the disorder also indicates a 
biological abnormality. Suppose a patient comes to a doctor in the tropics. The patient is running a high fever that 
abates, only to come back a day or two late r, abate again, return agai n, and so on every 48 to 72 hours. The doctor will 
recognize this instantly as malaria, becau se of the rhythmicity of the disorder. It  has to do with the life cycle of the 
malarial parasite as it moves from red blood cells to th e liver and spleen. The rhythm icity screams biology. In the 
same way, certain subtypes of depression have a rhythm. A manic-depressive may be manic for five days, severely 
depressed for the following week, then mildly depressed for half a week or so, and, fi nally, symptom-free for a few 
weeks. Then the pattern starts up again, and may have been  doing so for a decade. Good things and bad things happen, 
but the same cyclic rhythm continues, which suggests just as much deterministic biology as in the life cycle of the 
malarial parasite. In another subset of depression the rhythm is annual, where sufferers get depressed during the 
winter. These are called seasonal aff ective disorders (SADs; "affective" is  the psychiatric term for emotional 
responses), and are thought to be related to patterns of exposure to light; recent work has uncovered a class of retinal 
cells that respond to light intensity and, surprisingly, send their information directly into the limbic system, the 
emotional part of the brain. Again, the rhythmicity appears independent of external life ev ents; a biological clock is 
ticking away in there that has something to do with mood, and something is seriously wrong with its ticking.
THE BIOLOGY OF DEPRESSION Neurochemistry and Depression
Considerable evidence exists th at something is awry with the chemistry of the brains of depressives. In order to 
appreciate that, it is necessary to lear n a bit about how brain cells communicate with one another. The illustration on 
page 279 shows a schematic version of two neurons, the principal type of brain cell. If a neuron has become excited 
with some thought or memory (metaphorically speaking), it s excitement is electrical—a wave of electricity sweeps 
from the dendrites over the cell body, down the axon to the axon terminals. When the wave  of electrical excitation 
reaches the axon terminal, it releases  chemical messengers that float acr oss the synapse. These messengers—Page 143 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmneurotransmitters— bind to specialized receptors on the adjacent dendri te, causing the second neuron to become 
electrically excited.
A minor piece of housekeep ing, however: What happens to the neurotrans mitter molecule after it has done its job and 
floats off the receptor? In some cases, it is recycled—tak en back up by the axon term inal of the first neuron and 
repackaged for future use. Or it can be  degraded in the synapse and the debris  flushed out to sea (the cerebrospinal 
fluid, then to the blood, and then th e urine). If these processes of clearing neurotransmitters out of the way fail 
(reuptake ceases or degradation stops or both), sudden ly a lot more neurotransmitter re mains in the synapse, giving a 
stronger signal to the second neuron than usual. Thus, the proper disposal of these powerful messengers is integral to 
normal neuronal communication.
There are trillions of synapses in the brain. Do we need trillions of chemically unique neurotransmitters? Certainly 
not. You can generate a seemingly infinite number of messages with a finite number of messengers; consider how 
many words we can form with the mere twenty-six letters in our alphabet. All you need are rules that allow for the 
same messenger to convey different meanings, metaphori cally speaking, in different contexts. At one synapse, 
neurotransmitter A sends a message relevant to pancreatic regulation, while at another synapse the same 
neurotransmitter substance may pertain to adolescent crus hes. There are many neurotra nsmitters, probably on the 
order of a few hundred, but certainly not trillions.
So that's a primer on how neurons talk to each other with neurotra nsmitters. The best evidence suggests that 
depression involves abnormal levels of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, serotonin,
A neuron that has been excited conveys information to other neurons by means of chemical signals at synapses, the 
contact points between neurons. When the impulse reaches the axon terminal of the signaling neuron, it induces the 
release of neurotransmitter molecule s. Transmitters diffuse across a narrow cleft and bind to receptors in the 
adjacent neuron's dendritic spine.
and dopamine. Before reviewing the evid ence, it's important to clear up a point. You are no doubt thinking, "Wasn't 
there something about norepinephrine and the sympathetic nervous system many chapters ago?" Absolutely, and that 
proves the point about the varied roles played by any given neurotransmitter. In one part of the body (the heart, for 
example), norepinephrine is a messenger con cerning arousal and the Four F's, whil e in a different part of the nervous 
system, norepinephrine seems to have something to do with the symptoms of depression.
Why is it likely that there is something wrong with norepinephrine, serotonin, or dopamine in depression? The best 
evidence is that most of the drugs that  lessen depression increase the amount of signaling by these neurotransmitters. 
One class of antidepressants, called tric yclics (a reference to their biochemical  structure), stops the recycling, or
reuptake, of these neurotransmitters into the axon terminal s. The result is that the neurotransmitter remains in the 
synapse longer and is likely to hit its respective r eceptor a second or third time. Anot her class of drugs, called MAO Page 144 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htminhibitors, blocks the degradation of these neurotransmitte rs in the synapse by inhibiting the action of a crucial 
enzyme in that degradation, monoamine oxidase, or MAO. The result, again, is that more of the messenger remains in 
the synapse to stimulate the dendrite of the recei ving neuron. These findings genera te a pretty straightforward 
conclusion: if you use a drug that incr eases the amount of norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine in synapses 
throughout the brain, and as a result, someone's depression  gets better, there must have been too little of those 
neurotransmitters in the first place. Case closed.
Naturally, not so fast. As a first issue of confusion, is the problem with serotonin, dopamine, or norepinephrine? The 
tricyclics and MAO inhibitors work on all three neurotrans mitter systems, making it impossible to tell which one is 
critical to the disease. Peop le used to think norepinephrine was the culpr it, when it was thought  that those classical 
antidepressant drugs worked only on the norepinephrine synapse. These days, most of the excitement centers on 
serotonin, mainly because of the effi cacy of reuptake inhibitors that work  only on serotonin synapses (selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs , of which Prozac is the most famous).  However, there still remains some 
reason to think that the other two neurotransmitters remain pa rt of the story, since some of the newest antidepressants 
appear to work on them more than on serotonin.*
A second piece of confusion is actually qu ite major. Is the defect in depression with these neurotransmitters really one 
of too little neurotransmitter in the synapse? You would th ink this was settled—the effective antidepressant drugs 
increase the amounts of these neurotrans mitters in the synapse and alleviate depression; thus, the problem had to be 
too little of the stuff to begin with. However, some clin ical data suggest that this might not be so simple.
The stumbling block has to do with timing. Expose the br ain to some tricyclic antidep ressant, and the amount of 
signaling with these
* The current herbal rage, St. John's wort, has been gaining some credibility in traditi onal scientific circles. It inhibits th e uptake of serotonin, 
dopamine, and norepinephrine, and seems to be roughly as effectiv e an antidepressant as Prozac. Mo reover, in people who are not  taking any 
additional medication, it appears to have somewhat fewer side ef fects than do the SSRIs. Howeve r, there is increasing evidence that it can seriously 
disrupt the effectiveness of a wi de variety of other medications.
neurotransmitters in the synapses changes within hours. However, give that same drug to a depressed person, and it 
takes weeks for the person to feel bette r. Something doesn't quite fit. Two theo ries have arisen in recent years that 
might reconcile this problem with timing, and they are both ex tremely complicated.
Revisionist theory 1, the "it's not too little neurotransmitter, it's actually too much" hypothesis. First, some orientation. 
If somebody constantly yells at you, you stop listening. Analogously, if you inundate a cell with lots of a 
neurotransmitter, the cell will not "liste n" as carefully—it will "down-regulate" (decrease) the number  of receptors for 
that neurotransmitter, in order to decrease its sensitivity to  that messenger. If, for exampl e, you double the amount of 
serotonin reaching the dendrites of a cel l and that cell down-regulates its se rotonin receptors by 50 percent, the 
changes roughly cancel out. If the cell do wn-regulates less than 50 percent, the net result is more serotonin signaling 
in the synapse; if more than 50 percent, the result is actua lly less signaling in the synapse. In other words, how strong 
the signal is in a synapse is a function both of how loudly the first neuron yells (the amount of neurotransmitter 
released) and of how sensitively the s econd neuron listens (how many receptors it has fo r the neurotransmitter).
Okay, ready. This revisionist th eory states that the original problem is that there is actually too much norepinephrine, 
serotonin, and/or dopamine in parts of the brains of depressives. What happens when you prescribe antidepressants 
that increase signaling of these neurotransmitters even furt her? At first, that should make the depressive symptoms 
worse. (Some psychiatrists argue that this actually does occur.) Over the co urse of a few weeks, however, the 
dendrites say, "This is intolerable, a ll this neurotransmitter; le t's down-regulate our recepto rs a whole lot." If this 
occurs and, critical to the theory, more than compensates for the increased neurotransmi tter signal, the depressive 
problem of excessive neurotransmitter signaling goes away: the person feels better.
Revisionist theory 2, "It really is too little norepinephrine, serotonin, and/or dopamine afte r all." This theory is even 
more complicated than the fi rst, and also requires orientation. No t only do dendrites contain receptors for 
neurotransmitters, but it  turns out that on the axon termin als of the "sending" neuron as well there are receptors for the 
very neurotransmitters being released by that neuron. What possible purpos e could these so-cal led autoreceptors 
serve? Neurotransmitters are released, float into the synaps e, bind to the standard recep tors on the second neuron. 
Some neurotransmitter molecules, however,  will float back and wind up bindin g to the autoreceptors. They serve as 
some
sort of feedback signal ; if, say, 5 percent of the released neurotransm itter reaches the autorecep tors, the first neuron 
can count its toes, multiply by 20, and figure out how much  neurotransmitter it has released. Then it can make some 
decisions—should I release more neurotransmitter or stop now? Should I start synthesizing more? and so on. If this 
process lets the first neuron do its bookkeeping on neurotransmitter expenditures, what happens if the neuron down-
regulates a lot of these autoreceptors? Underestimating the amount of neurotransmitter it has released, the neuron will 
inadvertently start increas ing the amount it synthesizes and discharges.Page 145 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWith this as background, here's the reasoning behind the s econd theory (that there really is too little norepinephrine, 
serotonin, or dopamine in a part of the brain of depressives). Give the antidepressant drugs that increase signaling of 
these neurotransmitters. Because of the in creased signaling, over the course of weeks there will be down-regulation of 
norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine r eceptors. Critical to this theory is th e idea that the autoreceptors on the first 
neuron will down-regulate to a greater extent than the receptors on the s econd neuron. If that happens, the second 
neuron may not be listening as well, but the first one will be  releasing sufficient extra neurotransmitter to more than 
overcome that. The net result is enha nced neurotransmitter signaling, and depressive symptoms abate. (This 
mechanism may explain the efficacy of el ectroconvulsive therapy, EC T, or "shock therapy." For decades psychiatrists 
have used this technique to alleviate major depressions, and no one has quite known why it works. It turns out that 
among its many effects ECT decreases th e number of norepinephrine autorecepto rs, at least in experimental animal 
models.)
If you are confused by now, you are in some good company,  as the entire field is extremely unsettled. Norepinephrine, 
serotonin, or dopamine? Too much or too little signaling? If  it is, for example, too little serotonin signaling, is it 
because too little serotoni n is being released into synaps es, or because there is some de fect blunting the sensitivity of 
serotonin receptors? (To give you a sense of how big a can of  worms that one is, there ar e currently recognized more 
than a dozen different types of  serotonin receptors, with diff ering functions, efficacies, and distributions in  the brain.) 
Maybe there are a variety of different neurochemical routes  for getting to a depression, and different pathways are 
associated with different subtypes of depression (unipolar versus manic depression, or one that is triggered by outside 
events versus one that runs with its own internal clockwork, or one
dominated by psychomotor retardation versus one dominated by  sui-cidalism). This is a very reasonable idea, but the 
evidence for it is still scant.
Amid all those questions, another good one—why does having too much or too little of these neurotransmitters cause 
a depression? There are a lot of  links between these neurotransmitters and fu nction. For example, serotonin is thought 
to have something to do with incessant ideation in depression, the uncontrollable wallowing in those dark thoughts. 
Connected with this, SSRIs are often ef fective on people with obsessive-compuls ive disorder. There is a commonality 
here: in the depressive case, it is the obsessive sense of failur e, of doom, of despair, while in the latter case, it can be 
obsessive worries that you left the gas on at home when yo u left, that your hands are dirty and need to be washed, and 
so on. Trapped in a mind that just circles and circles around the same thoughts or feelings.
Norepinephrine is thought to play a different role in the symptoms of depression. The major pathway that utilizes 
norepinephrine is an array of projections from a brain region called the locus ceruleu s. That projection extends 
diffusely throughout the brain and seems to play a role in  alerting other brain regions— increasing their baseline level 
of activation, lowering their threshold for responding to outside signals. Thus, a shortage of norepinephrine in this 
pathway might begin to explain the psychomotor retardation.
Dopamine, meanwhile, has something to do  with pleasure, a connectio n that will be reviewed at length in chapter 16. 
Several decades ago, some neuroscientists made a fundam ental discovery. They had im planted electrodes into the 
brains of rats and stimulated areas here and there, seeing what would happen. By doing so, they found an 
extraordinary area of th e brain. Whenever this area was stimulated, th e rat became unbelievably  happy. So how can 
one tell when a rat is unbelievably happy? You ask the rat to tell you, by charting how-many times it is willing to 
press a lever in order to be rewarded with stimulation in that part of the brain. It turns out that rats will work 
themselves to death on that lever to ge t stimulation. They would rather be stim ulated there than ge t food when they 
are starving, or have sex, or receive drugs even when they're ad dicted and going through w ithdrawal. The region of 
the brain targeted in these studies was promptly called the "pleasure pathway" and has been famous since.
That humans have a pleasure pathway was discovered shortly afterward by stimulating a similar part of the human 
brain duringneurosurgery.* The results are pretty am azing. Something along the li nes of "Aaaaah, boy, that f eels good. It's kind of 
like getting your back rubbed but also sort of like sex or playing in the backyard in the leaves when you're a kid and 
Mom calling you in for hot chocolate and then you get into your pajamas with the feet...." Where can we sign up?
This pleasure pathway seems to make heavy use of dopamine  as a neurotransmitter (and in chapter 16, we'll see how 
dopamine signals the anticipation of reward more than it si gnals reward itself). The str ongest evidence for this is the 
ability of drugs that mimic dopamine, such as cocaine, to act as euphoriants. Suddenly, it seems plausible to 
hypothesize that depression, which is ch aracterized above all by dysphoria, might involve too little dopamine and, 
thus, dysfunction of those pleasure pathways.
Thus, these are the big three when it co mes to the neurotransmitters implicated in depression, with attention these 
days probably being the most for sero tonin and the least for dopamine. All of  the leading antidep ressant drugs—the 
SSRIs, and older classes such as tricyclics or MAO inhibitors—work by altering the levels of one or more of these Page 146 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthree neurotransmitters. At this point, there is nothing close to resembling a science as to which sort of person will 
respond best to which type of antidepressants.
Naturally, there's a spate of other neurotransmitters that may be involved. One particularly interesting one is called 
Substance P. Decades of work have shown that Substance P plays a role  in pain perception, with a major role in 
activating the spinal cord pathways disc ussed in chapter 9. Remark ably, some recent studies indicate that drugs that 
block the action of Substance P can work as antidepressants in some individuals. What's this about? Perhaps the sense 
of depression as a disease of "psychic pain" may be more than just a metaphor.
Neuroanatomy and Depression
I introduce an illustration here of what the brain looks like, to consider a second way in which brain function might be 
abnormal in
* Because the brain is not sensitive to pain, a lot of such su rgery is done on patients who are awake (with their scalps anesth etized, of course). This 
is helpful, because prior to modern imaging techniques, surgeons often had to have the patient awake to guide what they were do ing. Place an 
electrode in the brain, stimulate, the pa tient flops her arm. Go a little deeper with  the electrode, stimulate, and the patient  flops her leg. Quick, 
consult your brain road map, figure out where you are, go an in ch deeper, hang a left past the third neuron, and there's the tu mor. That sort of thing.
The triune brain.
depressives, in addition to the neurochemistry discussed. On e region regulates processes like your breathing and heart 
rate. It includes the hypothalamus, which is busy releasi ng hormones and instructing the autonomic nervous system. If 
your blood pressure drops drastically, causing a compensatory  stress-response, it is the hypothalamus, midbrain, and 
hindbrain that kick into gear. All sorts of vertebrates have roughly the same connections here.
Layered on top of that is a region called the limbic system, the functioning of which is related to emotion. As 
mammals, we have large limbic systems; lizards have relatively tiny limbic systems—they are not noted for the 
complexity of their emotional lives. If you get a stress-resp onse from smelling the odor of a threatening rival, it's your 
limbic system that is involved.
Above that is the cortex. Everyone in the animal kingdom has some, but it is a real primate specialty. The cortex does 
abstract cognition, invents philosophy, remembers where your car keys are. The stuff of the previous chapter.
Now think for a second. Suppose you are gored by an elephant. You may feel a certain absence of pleasure afterward, 
maybe a sense of grief. Throw in a little psychomotor retardation—you're not as eager
for your calisthenics as usual. Sleeping and feeding may be disrupted, glucocorticoid levels may be a bit on the high 
side. Sex may lose its appeal for a while. Hobbies are not as enticing; you don't jump up to go out with friends; you 
pass up that all-you-can-eat buffet. Sound like some of the symptoms of a depression?
Now, what happens during a depression? You think a thought about your mortality or that of a loved one; you imagine 
children in refugee camps, the rain fore sts disappearing and endless species of lif e evaporating, late Beethoven string Page 147 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmquartets, and suddenly you experience so me of the same symptoms as after being gored by the elephant. On an 
incredibly simplistic level, you can think of depression as  occurring when your cortex thinks an abstract negative 
thought and manages to convince the rest of  the brain that this is as real as a physical stressor. In this view, people 
with chronic depressions are those whose cortex habitually whispers sad thoughts to the rest of the brain. Thus, an 
astonishingly crude prediction: cut the c onnections between the cortex  and the rest of a depressive's brain, and the 
cortex will no longer be able to get the rest of the brain depressed.
Remarkably, it actually works sometimes. Neurosurgeons may perform this procedure on people with vastly crippling 
depressions that are resistant to drugs, ECT, or other forms of therapy. Afterward, depressive symptoms seem to 
abate.*
Obviously, this is a simplified picture—no one actually disconn ects the entire cortex from th e rest of the brain. After 
all, the cortex does more th an mope around feeling bad about the final chapter of Of Mice and Men. The surgical 
procedure, called a cingulotomy, or a cingulum bundle cut,  actually disconnects just one area toward the front of the 
cortex, called the anterior cingulate co rtex (ACC). The ACC is turning out to have all the characteristics of a brain 
region you'd want to take offline in a major depression. It's a part of the brain that is very concerned with emotions. 
Show people arrays of pictures: in one case, ask them to pay attention to the emotions being expressed by people in 
the pictures; in another case, ask them to pay attention to details like whether these are indoor or outdoor photographs. 
In only the former case do you get activation of the ACC.
* What else changes after this surgical procedure? If the cortex can no longer send abstract thoughts to the rest of the brain,  the person should not 
only lose the capacity for abstr act misery but for abstract pleasure as well, and this is what happens; bu t surgery such as thi s is a therapy employed 
only in patients completely incap acitated by their illness, who spen d decades on the back ward of  some state hospital, rocking and clutching 
themselves and feebly  attempting suicide with some regularity.
And the emotions that the ACC is involved in seem to be negative ones. Induce a positive state in someone by 
showing something amusing, and ACC me tabolism decreases. In contrast, if y ou electrically stimulate the ACC in 
people, they feel a shapeless sense of fear and forebo ding. Moreover, neurons in the ACC, including in humans, 
respond to pain of all sorts. But the ACC response isn't real ly about the pain; it more concerns feelings about the pain. 
As was discussed in chapter 9, give someone a hypnotic suggestion that they will not feel the pain of dipping their 
hand into ice water. The primary parts of the brain that get pa in projections from the spinal cord get just as active as if 
there were no hypnotic suggestion. But this time, the ACC doesn't activate.
In addition, the ACC and adj acent brain regions activate when you show wi dows pictures of their lost loved ones 
(versus pictures of strangers). As an other example of this, put a volunteer in  a brain-imaging machine and, from 
inside, ask them to play some game with two other people, via a computer console. Rig up the flow of the game so 
that, over time, the other tw o (actually, a computer program) gradually begin just play ing with each other, excluding 
the test subject. Neuronal activity in th e ACC lights up, and the more left out th e person feels, the more intensely the 
ACC activates. How do you know this has something to do with that dread junior high school feeling of being picked 
last for the team? Because of a clever control in the study: set the person up to play wi th the supposed other two 
players. Once again, it winds up that th e other two only play against each other.  The difference, this  time, though, is 
that early on the subject is told there's been a technical g litch and that their computer console isn't working. Excluded 
because of a snafu in the techno logy, there's no ACC activation.
Given these functions of the ACC, it is not surprising that its resting level of activity tends to be elevated in people 
with a depression—this is the fear and pain and foreboding churning away at those neurons. Interestingly, another part 
of the brain, called the amygdala, seems to be hyperactive in depressives as well. We will hear lots about the role of 
the amygdala in fear and anxiety in th e next chapter. However, in depressive s, the amygdala seems to have been 
recruited into a different role. Show a depressed person a fearful human face and his amygdala doesn't activate all that 
much (in contrast to the response you' d see in the amygdala of a control su bject). But show him a sad face and the 
amygdala gets a highly exaggerated activation.
Sitting just in front of the ACC is the frontal cortex which,  as we saw in chapter 11, is one of the most distinctly 
human parts of the
brain. Work by Richard Davidson of the University of Wisconsin has shown that one subregion called the prefrontal 
cortex (PFC) seems highly responsive to mood, and in a late ralized way. Specifically, activation of the left PFC is 
associated with positive moods, and activ ation of the right PFC, with negative. For example, induce a positive state in 
someone (by asking him to describe the happiest day of his life), and the left PFC lights up, in proportion to the 
person's subjective assessment of his pleasure. Ask him to  remember a sad event, an d the right PFC dominates. 
Similarly, separate an infant monkey from its mother an d right PFC metabolism rises while left PFC decreases. Thus, 
not surprisingly, in depressives, there is decreased le ft PFC activity and elevated  activity in the right PFC.
There are a few other anatomical changes in  the brain in depression, but to make sense of those, we have to consider 
what hormones have to do with the disease.Page 148 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmGenetics and Depression
It is hard to look at the biology of anything these days without genes coming into the picture, and depression is no 
exception. Depression has a genetic comp onent. As a first observation, depression runs in families. For a long time, 
that would have been sufficient evidence for some folks that there is a genetic link, but this conclusion is undone by 
the obvious fact that not only do genes run in families, environment does as well. Growing up in a poor family, an 
abusive family, a persecuted family, can all increase the risk of depression running through that family without genes 
having anything to do with it.
So we look for a tighter relationship. The more closely related two individuals are, the more genes they share in 
common and, as it turns out, the more likely they are to shar e a depressive trait. As one of the most telling examples 
of this, take any two siblings (who are not identical twins). They share something like 50 percent of their genes. If one 
of them has a history of depression, the other has about a 25 percent likelihood, considerably higher than would be 
expected by chance. Now, comp are two identical twins, who share all of thei r genes in common. And if one of them is 
depressive, the other has a 50 percent chance. This is quite impressive—the more genes in common, the more 
likelihood of sharing the disease. But there remains a confound: the more gene s people share within a family, the 
more environment they share as well (sta rting with the fact that identical twins grow up treated more similarly than 
are non-identical twins).
Tighten the relationship further. Look at children who were adopted at an early age. Consider those whose biological 
mother had a history of depression, but whose adoptive mother  did not. They have an in creased risk of depression, 
suggesting a genetic legacy shared with th eir biological mother. But the confound ther e, as we saw in chapter 6, is that 
"environment" does not begin at birth, but begins much earl ier, with the circulatory envi ronment shared in utero with 
one's biological mother.
For any card-carrying molecular biologist in the twenty-first century, if you want to prove that genes have something 
to do with depression, you're going to have to identify th e specific genes, the specific st retches of DNA that code for 
specific proteins that increase the risk for depression. As we'll s ee shortly, precisely that ha s occurred in recent years.
Immunology and Depression
This subsection did not exist in previous editions of this book. Immunity is about fighting off pathogens, depression is 
about feeling sad— unrelated subjects. Well, they can be related, but in an idiotically obvious way—like, duh, being 
sick can be depressing.
But it's more complicated than that. Ch ronic illness that i nvolves overactivation of the im mune system (for example, 
chronic infections, or an autoimmune disease where the immune system has acci dentally activated and is attacking 
some part of your body) is more likely to cause depression  than other equally severe and prolonged illnesses that don't 
involve the immune system. Some more threads of interc onnection involve th e cytokines that act as messengers 
between immune cells. As you'll recall fr om chapter 8, cytokines can also get in to the brain, where they can stimulate 
CRH release. More recently, it' s becoming clear that they also interact wi th norepinephrine, d opamine, and serotonin 
systems. Critically, cytokines can cause depression. This is shown in animal models of depression. Furthermore, 
certain types of cancers are sometimes tr eated with cytokines (to enhance immune  function), and this typically results 
in depression. So this represents a new branch of study for biological psychiatry—the interactions between immune 
function and mood.
Endocrinology and Depression
Abnormal levels of a number of different hormones often go hand in hand with depression. To begin, people who 
secrete too little thyroid
hormone can develop major depressions and, when depresse d, can be atypically resist ant to antidepressant drugs 
working. This is particularly important because many pe ople, seemingly with depressions of a purely psychiatric 
nature, turn out to have thyroid disease.
There is another aspect of depression in which hormones may play a role. The incidence of major, unipolar depression 
differs greatly, with women suffering far more than men. Even when you consider mani c depression, where there is 
no sex difference in its incidence, bipolar women have more depressive episodes than do bipolar men.
Why this female bias? It has nothing to do with the obvious first guess, which is that wo men are more likely to see a 
health professional for depression th an are men. The difference holds up ev en when such reporting biases are 
controlled for. One theory, fr om the school of cognitive therapy, concentrates on the ways in which women and men 
tend to think differently. When something upsetting happens , women are more likely to ruminate over it—think about 
it or want to talk about it with someone else. And men, terr ible communicators that they so  often are, are more likely 
to want to think about anything but the problem, or even better, go and do something—exercise, use power tools, get Page 149 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmdrunk, start a war. A ruminative tendency, the cognitive psychologists argue, makes you more likely to become 
depressed.
Another theory about the sex difference is psychosocial in nature. As we will see, much theorizing about the 
psychology of depression suggests that it is a disorder of lack of power and control, and some scientists have 
speculated that because women in so many societies traditi onally have less control over the circumstances of their 
lives than do men, they are at  greater risk for depression. In support of this idea, some psychiatrists have produced 
data suggesting that the elevated rates of depression in wo men decline to the levels seen in men in some traditional 
societies in which women don't have a subordinate role. Yet an other theory suggests that men really do have as high a 
rate of depression as do women, but they are simp ly more likely to mask it with substance abuse.
All of these ideas are reasonabl e, although they run into trouble when one considers that women and men, as noted, 
have the same rate of bipolar depression; it is only un ipolar depression that is more common among women. These 
theories seem particularly weak in thei r failure to explain a major feature of female depressions, namely, that women 
are particularly at risk for depressions at certain reproductive points: menstruation, menopause, and most of all, the 
weeks immediately after giving birth. A number of resear chers believe such increased risks are tied to the great 
fluctuations that occur during
menstruation, menopause, and parturition in two main horm ones: estrogen and progestero ne. As evidence, they cite 
the fact that women can get depressed when they artificially change their es trogen or progesterone levels (for 
example, when taking birth-co ntrol pills). Critically, both of these hormon es can regulate neuroche mical events in the 
brain, including the metabolism of neurotransmitters such as  norepinephrine and serotonin. With massive changes in 
hormone levels (a thousandfold for progesterone at the time of giving birth, for exampl e), current speculation centers 
on the possibility that the ratio of estrogen to progesterone can change radically enough to trigger a major depression. 
This is a new area of research with some seemingly cont radictory findings, but there is more and more confidence 
among scientists that there is a hormonal contribution to the preponderance of female depressions.
Obviously, the next subject in a section on hormones and de pression will have to look at glucocorticoids. But given 
how central this is to the whole venture of  this book, the subject requires expansion.
HOW DOES STRESS INTERACT
WITH THE BIOLOGY Of DEPRESSION?Stress, Glucocorticoids, and the Onset of Depression
The first stress-depression link is an obvious one, in that stress and depression tend to go together. This can run in two 
directions. First, studies of what is called "stress generatio n" among depressives look at the fact that people who are 
prone to depression tend to experience st ressors at a higher than expected rate . This is even s een when comparing 
them to individuals with other psychiatric disorders or health problems. Much of this appears to be stressors built 
around lack of social support.  This raises the potential for a vicious cycle to emerge. This is because if you interpret 
the ambiguous social interactions around you as signs of re jection, and respond as if you  have been rejected, it can 
increase the chances of winding up social ly isolated, thereby confirming your sense that you have been rejected....
But the major way in which people think about a link between stress and depression, and the one that concerns us 
here, has causality running in the other direction. Specifica lly, people who are undergoing a lot of life stressors are 
more likely than average to succumb to  a major depression, and people sunk in their first major depression are more 
likely than average to have undergone recent and significant
stress. Obviously, not everyone who undergoes major stressors sinks into depression, and what those individual 
differences are about should be cleare r as we proceed through this chapter.
As noted, some people have the grave misfortune of suffering from repeated depressive episodes, ones that can take 
on a rhythmic pattern stretching over years. When consider ing the case histories of those people, stressors emerge as 
triggers for only the first few depressions. In other words, have two, three major bouts of depression and, statistically, 
you are no more at risk for subsequent major depression than anyone else. But somewhere around the fourth 
depression or so, a mad clockwork takes over, and the depressive waves crash, regardless of whether the outside 
world pummels you with stressors. What that transition is about will be considered below.
Laboratory studies also link stress and the symptoms of depression. Stress a lab rat, and it becomes anhedonic. 
Specifically, it takes a strong er electrical current th an normal in the rat's pleasure pathways to activate a sense of 
pleasure. The threshold for perceiving pleasure has been raised, just as in a depressive.Page 150 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmCritically, glucocorticoids can do the same. A key point in chapter 10 was how glucocorticoids and stress could 
disrupt memory. Part of the evidence fo r that came from people wi th Cushing's syndrome (as a reminder, that is a 
condition in which any of a number of different types of tumors wind up causing vast excesses of glucocorticoids in 
the bloodstream), as well as fr om people prescribed high doses of glucocorticoids to treat a number of ailments. It has 
also been known for decades that a significant subset of  Cushingoid patients and pati ents prescribed synthetic 
glucocorticoids become clinically depressed, independent  of memory problems. This has been a bit tricky to 
demonstrate. First, when someone is initially treated with synt hetic glucocorticoids, the tendency is to get, if anything, 
euphoric and even manic, perhaps for a week or so before the depression kick s in. You can immediately guess that we 
are dealing with one of our di chotomies between short- and long-term stress physiology; chapter 16 will explore in 
even more detail where that transien t euphoria comes from. As a second comp lication, does someone with Cushing's 
syndrome or someone taking high pharmacological doses of synthetic glucocortico ids get depressed because 
glucocorticoids cause that state, or is  it because they recognize they have a depressing disease? Yo u show it is the 
glucocorticoids that are the culprits by demonstrating higher  depression rates in this population than among people 
with, for example, the same disease a nd the same severity but not receiving
glucocorticoids. At this stage, there' s also not much of a predictive scien ce to this phenomenon. For example, no 
clinician can reliably predict beforehand which patient is going to get depressed when put on high-dose 
glucocorticoids, let alone at what dose, an d whether it is when the dose is raised or lowered to that level. Nonetheless, 
have lots of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream and the risk of a depression increases.
Stress and glucocorticoids tangle up with biology in predisposing a person toward depression in an additional, critical 
way. Back to that business about there be ing a genetic component to depression. Does this mean that if you have "the 
gene" (or genes) "for" depression, that's it, you're up the creek, it's inevitabl e? Obviously not, and the best evidence 
for this is that factoid about  identical twins. One has depression and the ot her, sharing all the same genes, has about a 
50 percent chance of having the disease as  well, a much higher rate than in the general population. There, pretty solid 
evidence for genes being involved. But flip this the othe r way. Share every single gene with someone who is 
depressive and you still have a 50 percent chance of not having the disease.
Genes are rarely about inevitability, es pecially when it comes to humans, th e brain, or behavior. They're about 
vulnerability, propensities, tend encies. In this case, genes increase the risk of depression only in certain environments: 
you guessed it, only in st ressful environments. This is shown in a number of ways, but most dramatically in a recent 
study by Avshalom Caspi at King's College, London. Scientis ts identified a certain gene in humans that increases the 
risk of depression. More speci fically, it is a gene that comes in a few different "allelic vers ions"—a few different 
types or flavors that differ slightly in function; have one of those versions, and you're at increased risk. What that gene 
is I'm not telling yet; I'm saving it for the end of this chapter,  as it is a doozy. But the key thing is that having version 
X of this gene Z doesn't guarantee you get depression, it just increases your risk. And, in fact, knowing nothing more 
about someone than which version of gene Z she has doesn't increase your odds of predicting whether she gets 
depressed. Version X increases depression risk only wh en coupled with a history of repeated major stressors. 
Amazingly, the same has been shown w ith studies of some nonhuman primate species, who carry a close equivalent 
of that gene Z. It's not the gene that causes it. It's that the gene interacts with a certain  environment. More specifically, 
a gene that makes you vulnerable in a stressful environment.
Glucocorticoid profiles once a depression has been established
Not surprisingly, glucocorticoid levels are typically abnormal in people who are clinically depressed. A relatively infrequent subtype of depression, called "atypical depression," is dominated by the psychomotor features of the 
disease—an incapacitating phys ical and psychological exhaustion. Just as is the case with chro nic fatigue syndrome, 
atypical depression is char acterized by lower than norm al glucocorticoid levels. However, the far more common 
feature of depression is one of an overactive stress-response—somewhat of an  overly activated sympathetic nervous 
system and, even more dramatically, elev ated levels of glucocorticoids. This ad ds to the picture that depressed people, 
sitting on the edge of their beds without the energy to get up, are actually vigilant and aroused, with a hormonal 
profile to match—but the battle is inside them.
Research stretching back some forty year s has explored why, on a nuts-and-bolts level, glucocorticoid levels are often 
elevated in depression. The elevated levels appear to be due to too mu ch of a stress signal from the brain (back to 
chapter 2—remember that the adrenals typically secrete glucocor ticoids only when they are commanded to by the 
brain, via the pituitary), rather than the adrenals just getting some depressive glucocorticoid hiccup all on their own 
now and then. Moreover, the excessive s ecretion of glucocorticoids is due to what is called feedback resistance—in 
other words, the brain is less effective than it should be at shutting down glucocorticoid secretion. Normally, the 
levels of this hormone are tightly regulated—the brain senses  circulating glucocorticoid levels, and if they get higher 
than desired (the "desired" level shifts depending on whether events are calm or stressful), the brain stops secreting 
CRH. Just like the regulation of water in a toilet bowl ta nk. In depressives, this feedback regulation fails— 
concentrations of circulating glucocorticoids that should shut down the system fail to do so, as the brain does not 
sense the feedback signal.*Page 151 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* Careful readers will recall a discussion on page 248 of the use of the dexamethasone suppression test to show that many aged organisms have 
trouble turning off glucocorticoid secretion.  The same test is used here. The truly obsessively careful reader will recall that  during aging, the 
problem of shutting off glucocorticoid secretion—the "dexamethasone  resistance"—probably arises from damage to a part of the br ain that helps to 
terminate the glucocorticoid stress-response. Does similar damage occur in depression? As  we'll see, this might occur in some l ong-term 
depressives. However, the elevated glucocor ticoid levels occur in depressives with no evidence of damage. Most likely sustained  stress decreases 
the number of glucocorticoid recepto rs in that part of the brain, making the ne urons less effective at sensing the hormone in t he bloodstream.
What are the consequences of elevated glucocorticoid levels before and during a depression?
The first most critical question to as k is, how does an excess of glucocortico ids increase the risk of depression? A 
preceding section detailed, at great leng th, the considerable confus ion about whether depression is about serotonin or 
norepinephrine or dopamine. To the extent that this is the cas e, the glucocorticoid angle fits  well, in that the hormones 
can alter features of all three neurot ransmitter systems—the amount of neurotransmitter synthesized, how fast it is 
broken down, how many recepto rs there are for each neurotransmitter, ho w well the receptors work, and so on. 
Moreover, stress has been shown to cause many of the same changes as well. Sustained stress will deplete dopamine 
from those "pleasure" pathways, and norepinephrine from that alerting locus ceruleus part of the brain. Moreover, 
stress alters all sorts of aspects of the synthesis, release, efficacy, and breakdown of serotonin. It is  not clear which of 
those stress effects are most im portant, simply because  it is not clear which neurotrans mitter or neurotransmitters are 
most important. However, it is probably safe to say th at whatever neurochemical abnormalities wind up being shown 
definitively to underlie depression, th ere is precedent for stress and glucocortic oids causing those same abnormalities.
Those elevated glucocorticoid levels a ppear to have some other consequences  as well. They may play a role, for 
example, in the fact that de pressive patients often are at least mildly immunosuppressed, and are more prone to 
osteoporosis. Moreover, prolonged major depression increases the risk of heart disease abou t three- to fourfold, even 
after controlling for smoking and alcohol consumption, and the glucocorticoid excess is likely to contribute to that as 
well.
And there may be more consequences. Think back to chapter 10 and its discussion of the many ways in which 
glucocorticoids can damage the hippocampus. As that litera ture emerged in the 1980s, it immediately suggested that 
there may be problems with the hippocampus in people with  major depression. This speculation was reinforced by the 
fact that the type of memory most  often impaired in depression—decl arative memory—is mediated by the 
hippocampus. As was discussed in chapter 10, there is atrophy of the hippocampus in long-term depression. The 
atrophy emerges as a resu lt of the depression (rather than precedes it), and the longer the depressive  history, the more 
atrophy and the more memory problems. While no one has explicitly shown yet that the atrophy occurs only in those 
depressives with the elevated glucocortico id levels, the atrophy is most common in
the subtypes of depression in which the glucocorticoid excess is most common. Chroni c depression has also been 
associated in some studies with decreas ed volume in the frontal cortex. This was initially puzzling for those of us who 
view the world through glucoc orticoid-tinted glasses, but has recently been  resolved. In the ra t, the hippocampus is 
overwhelmingly the target in the brain for glucocorticoid action, as  measured by the densit y of receptors for the 
hormone; however, in the prim ate brain, the hippocampus and frontal co rtex seem to be equally and markedly 
sensitive to glucocorticoids.
So some pretty decent circumstantial  evidence suggests that the glucocor ticoid excess of depression may have 
something to do with the decreased vol ume of the hippocampus and frontal cortex . Chapter 10 noted an array of bad 
things that glucocorticoids could do to neurons. Some obsessively careful studies have shown loss of cells in the 
frontal cortex accompanying th e volume loss in depression—as one point of  confusion, it is those supportive glial 
cells rather than neurons that are lost. But in the hippocampus, no one has a clue yet; it could be the killing or 
atrophying of neurons, the inhibition of the birth of new neurons, or all the above.* Whatever the explanation is at the 
cellular level, it appears to be perman ent; years to decades after these major depressions have been gotten under 
control (typically with medication), the volume loss is still there.
Anti-glucocorticoids as antidepressants
The glucocorticoid-depression link has some important implications. When I first introduced that link at the beginning of the chapter, it was
* Chapter 10 detailed the revolutionary find ing that the adult brain, particularly the hippocampus, can make new neurons. It al so showed that stress 
and glucocorticoids are the strongest inhibitors of such neurogen esis. The finding also noted that  it is not clear yet what the se new neurons are good 
for, although it wouldn't be crazy to think that new neurons in the hippocampus might have something good to do for memory. Thu s, it doesn't 
seem crazy, either, to speculate  that an inhibition of neurogenesis in the hippocampus be fore and during depression might contr ibute to the memory 
problems that have been reviewed. This seem s plausible to me. But there is also the a dditional idea floating  around in the fiel d that the inhibition of 
neurogenesis gives rise to the emotional symptoms as well (that is to say, the anhedonia and grie f that define a depression),  and that antidepressants 
work by jump-starting hippocampal neurogenes is. This theory has garnered a lot of attention, and there have been some highly vi sible studies 
supporting it. Nonetheless, I don't find those studies or the ba sic idea to be too convincing—I can  come up with a route that l inks the functions of 
the hippocampus to the emotional features of a depression, but it feels way too convoluted to be at the core of what causes thi s disease. (You'll note 
that I bury this in a footnote, in the hope  that some colleagues whom I like and resp ect on the other side of this question won 't come and stab me.)Page 152 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmmeant to give some insight into the flavor of what a depression is like—a person looks like an enervated sea sponge, 
sitting there motionless on the edge of his bed, but he's actua lly boiling, in the middle of an internal battle. Tacit in 
that description was the idea that undergoing a depression is  actually immensely stressful, and, therefore,  among other 
things, stimulates glucocorticoid secr etion. The data just reviewed sugge st the opposite scenario—stress and 
glucocorticoid excess can be a cause of depr ession, rather than merely a consequence.
If that is really the case, then a no vel clinical intervention should work: take one of those depressives with high 
glucocorticoid levels, find some drug that works on the adre nals to lower glucocorticoid secretion, and the depression 
should lessen. And, very exciting, that has been shown. The approach, though, is filled with problems. You don't want 
to suppress glucocorticoid levels too mu ch because, umpteen pages in to this book, it should be apparent by now that 
those hormones are pretty impo rtant. Moreover, the "adrenal steroidogenesis inhibitors," as  those drugs are called, can 
have some nasty side effects. Nonetheless, some solid re ports have shown them to have antidepressant effects in 
people with high-glucocorticoid depressions.
Another version of the same approach is to use a drug that blocks glucocortico id receptors in the brain. These exist 
and are relatively safe, and there's no w decent evidence that they work as we ll.* A relatively obscure hormone called 
DHEA, which has some ability to block glucocorticoid acce ss to its receptor, has been  reported to have some 
antidepressant qualities as well. Thus, these recent studies not only teach us so mething about the bases of depression, 
but may open the way for a whole new generation of medications for the disease.
Some investigators have built on these observations with a fairly radical suggestion. For those biological psychiatrists 
concerned with the hormonal aspects of depression, the trad itional glucocorticoid scenario is outlined above. In it, 
depressions are stressful and raise glucocorticoid levels; wh en someone is treated with an tidepressants, the abnormal 
neurochemistry (related to serotonin, norepinephrine, etc.) is normalized, lessening the depression and, by the way, 
making life feel less stressful, with glucocorticoid levels returning to normal as a by-product. The new scenario is the 
logical extension of the inverted causality also just discussed. In this version, for any of a number of
* Interestingly, the best glucocorticoid r eceptor out there is a drug already famous— no torious to some—namel y, RU486, the "abo rtion drug." Not 
only does it block receptors in the uterus for progesterone, a nother steroid hormone, but it blocks glucocorticoid receptors ef fectively.
reasons, glucocorticoid levels rise in  someone (because the person is under a lot of stress, because something about 
the regulatory control of glucocorticoids is awry in that person), causing changes in the chemistry of serotonin (or 
norepinephrine, etc.) and a depression. In this scenario, antidepressants work by normalizing glucocorticoid levels, 
thereby normalizing the brain chemis try and alleviating the depression.
For this view to be supported, it has to be shown that the primary mechanism of action of the different classes of 
antidepressants is to work on the gluc ocorticoid system, and that  changes in glucocorticoid  levels precede the changes 
in brain chemistry or depressive symp toms. A few researchers have presented evidence that antidep ressants work to 
rapidly alter numbers of glucocorticoid r eceptors in the brain, altering regulato ry control of the system and lowering 
glucocorticoid levels, and these change s precede changes in the traditional symp toms of depression; other researchers 
have not observed this. As usual, more re search is needed. But even if it turns out that, in some patients, depression is 
driven by elevated glucocorticoid levels (and recovery from depression thus mediated by reduction of those levels), 
that can't be the general mechanism of the disease in all cases: only about half of depre ssives actually have elevated 
glucocorticoid levels. In the other half, the glucocorticoid  system seems to work perf ectly normally. Perhaps this 
particular stress/depression link is relevant only during the first few rounds of someone's depression (before the 
endogenous rhythmicity kicks in), or only in a subset of individuals.
We have now seen ways in which stress and glucocorticoids are intertwined with the biology of depression. That 
intertwining is made even ti ghter when considerin g the psychological picture of the disease.
STRESS AND THE PSYCHODYNAMICS OF MAJOR DEPRESSIONS
I have to begin with Freud. I know it is obligatory to dump on Freud, and some of it is deserved, but there is much that 
he still has to offer. I can think of few other scientists who, nearly a century after their major contributions, are still 
considered important and correct enough  for anyone to want to bother pointing out their errors instead of just 
consigning them to th e library archives.
Freud was fascinated with depression and fo cused on the issue that we began with—why is it that most of us can have 
occasional terrible experiences, feel depressed, and then r ecover, while a few of us coll apse into major depression 
(melancholia)? In his classic essay
"Mourning and Melancholia" (1917), Freud began with what the two have in common. In both cases, he felt, there is 
the loss of a love object. (In Freudian term s, such an "object" is usually a person, bu t can also be a goal or an ideal.) In 
Freud's formulation, in every loving relationship there is ambivalence, mixed feelings—elements of hatred as well as 
love. In the case of a small, reactive depression—mourning—you are able to d eal with those mixed feelings in a Page 153 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmhealthy manner: you lose, you grieve, and then you recover. In the case of a major melancholic depression, you have 
become obsessed with the ambivalence— the simultaneity, the irreco ncilable nature of the intense love alongside the 
intense hatred. Melancholia—a major depression—Freud th eorized, is the internal conflict generated by this 
ambivalence.
This can begin to explain the intensity  of grief experienced in a major depr ession. If you are obsessed with the 
intensely mixed feelings, you grieve doubly after a loss—for your loss of the loved individual and for the loss of any 
chance now to ever resolve the difficulties. "If only I had said the things I needed to, if only we could have worked 
things out"—for all of time, you have lost the chance to pu rge yourself of the ambivalence. For the rest of your life, 
you will be reaching for the d oor to let you into a place of  pure, unsullied love, and y ou can never reach that door.
It also explains the intensity of the guilt often experienced in major depression. If you truly harbored intense anger 
toward the person along with love, in th e aftermath of your loss there must be some facet of you that is celebrating, 
alongside the grieving. "He's gone; that's terrible but... thank god, I can finally live, I can finally grow up, no more of 
this or that." Inevitably, a metaphorical instant later, th ere must come a paralyzing belief that you have become a 
horrible monster to feel any sense of relief or  pleasure at a time like this. Incapacitating guilt.
This theory also explains the tendency of major depressives in such circumstances to, oddly, begin to take on some of 
the traits of the lost loved/hated one—and not just any traits, but invariably the ones that the survivor found most 
irritating. Psychodynamically, this is wonderfully logical. By taking on a trait, you are being loyal to your lost, 
beloved opponent. By picking an irritating trait, you are still trying to convince the world you were right to be 
irritated—you see how you hate it when I do it; can you imagin e what it was like to have to put up with that for years? 
And by picking a trait that, most of all, you find irritating, you are not only still trying to score points in your 
argument with the departed, but you are punishing yourself for arguing as well.
Out of the Freudian school of thought has come one of the more apt descriptions of depression—"aggression turned 
inward." Suddenly
the loss of pleasure, the psyc homotor retardation, the impulse to suicide all make sense. As do the elevated 
glucocorticoid levels. This does not describe someone too lethargic to function; it is more like the actual state of a 
patient in depression, exhausted from the most draining emotional conflict of his or her life—one going on entirely 
within. If that doesn't count as psychologically stressful, I don't know what does.
Like other good parts of Freud, these ideas are empathic and fi t many clinical traits; they just feel "right." But they are 
hard to assimilate into modern scien ce, especially biologically oriented ps ychiatry. There is no way to study the 
correlation between serotonin receptor de nsity and internalization of aggressi on, for example, or  the effects of 
estrogen-progesterone ratios on love-hate ratios. The branch  of psychological theorizing about depression that seems 
most useful to me, and is most tightly linked to stress, co mes from experimental psychology. Work in this field has 
generated an extraordinarily in formative model of depression.
STRESS, LEARNED HELPLESSNESS, AND DEPRESSION
In order to appreciate the experiment al studies underlying this model, r ecall that in the pr eceding chapter on 
psychological stress, we saw that certain features dominated as psychologically stressful: a loss of control and of 
predictability within certain contexts, a loss of outlets for frus tration, a loss of sources of support, a perception of life 
worsening. In one style of experiment, pioneered by the ps ychologists Martin Seligman a nd Steven Maier, animals are 
exposed to pathological amounts of these psychological stressors. The result is a condition strikingly similar to a 
human depression.
Although the actual stressors may differ, the general approach in these studies always emphasizes repeated stressors 
with a complete absence of c ontrol on the part of the animal . For example, a rat may be subjected to a long series of 
frequent, uncontrollable, and unpredictable shocks or noises, with no outlets.
After awhile, something extraordinary happens to that rat. This  can be shown with a test. Ta ke a fresh, unstressed rat, 
and give it something easy to learn. Put it in a room, for example, with the floor divided into two halves. 
Occasionally, electric ity that will cause a mild shock is delivered to  one half, and just beforehand, there is a signal 
indicating which half of the floor is about to be electrified. Your run-of-
the-mill rat can learn this "active avoida nce task" easily, and within a short time it  readily and calmly shifts the side of 
the room it sits in according to the signal. Simple. Except for a rat w ho has recently been ex posed to repeated 
uncontrollable stressors. That rat cannot l earn the task. It does not learn to cope. On the cont rary, it has learned to be 
helpless.
This phenomenon, called learned helplessness, is quite gene ralized; the animal has troubl e coping with all sorts of 
varied tasks after its exposure to uncontrollable stressors. Such helplessness extends to tasks having to do with its Page 154 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmordinary life, like competing with another animal for food, or avoiding social aggression. One might wonder whether 
the helplessness is induced by the physical stress of receivi ng the shocks or, instead, th e psychological stressor of 
having no control over or capacity to predict the shocks. It is the latter. The clearest way to demonstrate this is to 
"yoke" pairs of rats—one gets shocked under conditions marked by predictability and a certain degree of control, the 
other rat gets the identical pattern of shocks, but without the control or predictability. Only the latter rat becomes 
helpless.
Seligman argues persuasively that animals suffering from learned helplessness share many psychological features 
with depressed humans. Such animals ha ve a motivational problem—one of the r easons that they are helpless is that 
they often do not even attempt a coping response when they are in a new situ ation. This is quite similar to the 
depressed person who doesn't even try the simplest task  that would improve her life. "I'm too tired, it seems 
overwhelming to take on something like that, it's not going to work anyway...."
Animals with learned helplessness also  have a cognitive problem, something awry with how they perceive the world 
and think about it. When they do make the rare coping respons e, they can't tell whether it works or not. For example, 
if you tighten the associatio n between a coping response and a reward, a norma l rat's response rate increases (in other 
words, if the coping response works for the rat, it persists  in that response). In contrast , linking rewards more closely 
to the rare coping responses of a helpless rat has little effect on its response rate. Seligman believes that this is not a 
consequence of helpless animals somehow missing the rules of  the task; instead, he thinks , they have actually learned 
not to bother paying attention. By all logic, that rat sh ould have learned, "When I am getting shocked, there is 
absolutely nothing I can do, and that feels terrible, but it isn't the whole world; it isn't true for everything." Instead, it 
has learned, "There is nothing I can do. Ever." Even when control and mastery are potentially made available to it, the 
rat cannot perceive them. This is very similar to the
depressed human who always sees glasses half empty. As Beck and other cognitive therap ists have emphasized, much 
of what constitutes a depression is centered around responding to one awful thing and overgeneralizing from it—
cognitively distorting how the world works.
The learned helplessness paradigm produces animals with other features strikingly similar to those in humans with 
major depressions. There is a rat's equivalent of dysphoria—t he rat stops grooming itself and loses interest in sex and 
food. The rat's failure even to attempt coping responses suggests that it experiences an animal eq uivalent of 
psychomotor retardation.* In some mode ls of learned helplessness, animals mu tilate themselves, biting at themselves. 
Many of the vegetative symptoms appear as well—sleep loss and disorganization of sl eep architecture, elevated 
glucocorticoid levels. Most critically, these animals tend to be depleted of norepinephrine in certain parts of the brain, 
while antidepressant drugs and ECT speed up their recovery from the learned helplessness state.
Learned helplessness has been induced in rodents, cats, dogs , birds, fish, insects, and primates, including humans. It 
takes surprisingly little in terms of uncontrollable unpleas antness to make humans give up and become helpless in a 
generalized way. In one study by Donald Hiroto, student volunteers were exposed to eith er escapable or inescapable 
loud noises (as in all such studies, the two groups were paired  so that they were exposed to the same amount of noise). 
Afterward, they were given a learning task in which a correct response turned off a loud noise; the "inescapable" 
group was significantly less capable of learning the task. Helplessness can even be generalized to
* One might wonder if the entire learned helplessness phenomenon is really just about psychomotor retard ation. Perhaps the rat is so wiped out 
after the uncontrollable shocks that it simply  doesn't have the energy to perform activ e avoidance coping tasks. This would shi ft the emphasis away 
from learned helplessness as a co gnitive state ("there is nothing I can do about this") or an an hedonic emotional state ("nothi ng feels pleasurable") 
to one of psychomotor inhibition ("everything seems so exhausti ng that I'm just going to sit he re"). Seligman and Maier strongl y object to this 
interpretation and present data showing that rats with learned helplessne ss are not only as active as control rats but, more im portant, are also 
impaired in "passive avoidance tasks"— lear ning situations where the coping response involves remaining s till, rather than actu ally doing 
something (in other words, situations wh ere a little psychomotor retardation should help). Championing the psychomotor  retardation view is 
another major figure in this field, Jay Weiss, who presents an eq ual amount of data showing that "helpless" rats perform normal ly on passive 
avoidance tasks, indicating that the helple ssness is a motor phenomenon and not a cogniti ve or emotional one. This debate has b een going on for 
decades and I sure don't know how  to resolve the conflicting views.
nonaversive learning situations. Hiroto and Seligman did a follow-up study in which, again, there was either 
controllable or uncontrollable noise. Afterward the latter group was less capable of solving simple word puzzles. 
Giving up can also be induced by stressors far more subtle than uncontrollable loud noises. In another study, Hiroto 
and Seligman gave volunteers a learning ta sk in which they had to pick a card of  a certain color according to rules that 
they had to discern along the way. In one group, these rules were learnable; in the other group, the rules were not (the 
card color was randomized). Afterward, the latter group was less capable of coping with a simple and easily solved 
task. Seligman and colleagues have also demonstrated that unsolvable tasks in duced helplessness afterward in social 
coping situations.
Thus humans can be provoked into at leas t transient cases of learned helplessness,  and with surprising ease. Naturally, 
there is tremendous individual variation in how readily this happens—some of us are more vulnerable than others (and 
you can bet that this is going to be important in considering stress management in the final chapter). In the experiment 
involving inescapable noise, Hiroto had given the students a personality inventory beforehand. Based on that, he was Page 155 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmable to identify the students who came in to the experiment with a strongly "int ernalized locus of control"—a belief 
that they were the masters of their ow n destiny and had a great deal of contro l in their lives—and, in contrast, the 
markedly "externalized" volunteers, who tended to attribut e outcomes to chance and luck . In the aftermath of the 
uncontrollable stressor, the exte rnalized students were far more vulnerable to learned helplessness.  Transferring that 
to the real world, with the sa me external stressors, the more  that someone has an internal locus of control, the less the 
likelihood of a depression.
Collectively, these studies strike me  as extremely important in forming links among stress, personality, and 
depression. Our lives are repl ete with incidents in which we become irrationally helpless. Some are silly and 
inconsequential. Once in the African cam p that I shared with Laurence Frank, the zoologist whose hyenas figured in 
chapter 7, we managed to make a disa ster of preparing macaroni and cheese ov er the campfire. Inspecting the mess, 
we ruefully admitted that it might have helped if we had bothered to read the instructions on the box. Yet we had both 
avoided doing that; in fact, we both fe lt a formless dread about trying to ma ke sense of such instructions. Frank 
summed it up: "Face it. We suffer from learned cooking helplessness."
But life is full of more significant exampl es. If a teacher at a critical  point of our education, or  a loved one at a critical 
point of our
emotional development, frequently exposes us to his or her own specialized uncontrollable stressors, we may grow up 
with distorted beliefs about what we cannot learn or ways  in which we are unlikely to be loved. In one chilling 
demonstration of this, some psychologists studied inner-city school kids with severe reading problems. Were they 
intellectually incapable of reading? Apparently not. Th e psychologists circumvented the students' resistance to 
learning to read by, instead, teaching them Chinese characters. Within hours they were capable of reading more 
complex symbolic sentences than they could in English. The children had apparently been previously taught all too 
well that reading English was beyond their ability.
A major depression, these findings suggest, can be the outcome of particularly severe lessons in uncontroUability for 
those of us who are already vulnerable. Th is may explain an array of findings that  show that if a child is stressed in 
certain ways—loss of a parent to death, divorce of parents, being a victim of abusive parenting—the child is more at 
risk for depression years later. What could be a more severe lesson that awful things can happen that are beyond our 
control than a lesson at an age when we are first forming our impressions about the nature of the world? As an 
underpinning of this, Paul Plotsky and Charles Nemeroff of Emory University have shown that rats or monkeys 
exposed to stressors early in life have a lif elong increase in CRH levels in their brain.
"According to our model," writes Seligman, "depression is  not generalized pessimism, bu t pessimism specific to the 
effects of one's own skilled actions." Su bjected to enough uncontrollable stress, we learn to be helpless—we lack the 
motivation to try to live because we assume the worst; we lack the cognitive clarity to perceive  when things are 
actually going fine, and we feel an ach ing lack of pleasure in everything.*
* Before we leave the issue of learned helplessness, let me ackno wledge that these are brutal experiments to subject an animal to. Is there no 
alternative? Painfully, I think no t. You can study cancer in a pe tri dish—grow a tumor and then see if some drug slows the tumo r's growth, and with 
what other toxicity; you can experiment w ith atherosclerotic plaque formation in a dish—grow blood-vessel cells and see if your  drug removes 
cholesterol from their sides, and at what dosage. But you can't mimic depression in a petri dish, or with a computer. Millions of us are going to 
succumb to this nightmarish diso rder, the treatments are still not very good, and an imal models remain the best methods for see king improvement. 
If you are of the school that believes that  animal research, while sad, is acceptable, your goal is to do only good science on the smallest number of 
animals with the least pain.
ATTEMPTING AN INTEGRATION
Psychological approaches to depression give us some insight into the nature of the disease. According to one school, it 
is a state brought about by pathological overexposure to loss of control and outlets for frustration. In another 
psychological view, the Freudian  one, it is the internalized battle of ambivalences, aggression turned inward. These 
views contrast with the more biological ones—that depression is a disorder of abnormal neurotransmitter levels, 
abnormal communication between certai n parts of the brain, abnormal hormone ratios, genetic vulnerability.
There are extremely different ways of lo oking at the world, and researchers and clinicians from different orientations 
often don't have a word to say to one another about their mutual interest in depression. Sometimes they seem to be 
talking radically differ ent languages— psychodynamic am bivalence versus neurotransm itter autoreceptors, cognitive 
overgeneralization versus allelic variants of genes.
What I view as the main point of this chapter is that st ress is the unifying theme that pulls together these disparate 
threads of biology and psychology.
We have now seen some important links between stress an d depression: extremes of ps ychological stress can cause 
something in a laboratory animal that looks pretty close to  a depression. Moreover, stress is a predisposing factor in 
human depression as well, and brings about some of the t ypical endocrine changes of depression. In addition, genes Page 156 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthat predispose to depression only do so in a stressful environment. Tightening the link further, glucocorticoids, as a 
central hormone of the stress-response, can bring about depression-like states in  an animal, and can cause depression 
in humans. And finally, both stress and glucocorticoids can bring about neurochemical changes that have been 
implicated in depression.
With these findings in hand, the pieces begin to fit together. Stress, particularly in the fo rm of extremes of lack of 
control and outlets, causes an array of deleterious changes in a person. Cognitively, this involves a distortive belief 
that there is no control or outlets in any circumstance-learned helple ssness. On the affective le vel, there is anhedonia; 
behaviorally, there is psychomotor retardation. On the neur ochemical level, there are likel y disruptions of serotonin, 
norepinephrine, and dopamine signaling—as will be shown in chapter 16, prolonged stress can deplete dopamine in 
the pleasure pathways.
Physiologically, there are alterations in, among other things, appetite, sleep patterns, and sensitivity of the 
glucocorticoid system to feedback regulation. We call this array of changes, collectively, a major depression.
This is terrific. I believe we have a stress-related disease on  our hands. But some critical questions remain to be asked. 
One concerns why it is that after three or so bouts of major depression the stress-depression link uncouples. This is the 
business about depressive episodes taking on an internal rhythm of their own, independent of whether the outside 
world is actually pummeling you with stressors. Why should  such a transition occur? At  present, there's a lot of 
theorizing but very little in the way of actual data.
But the most basic question remains, why do only some of us get depressed? An  obvious answer is  because some of 
us are exposed to a lot more stressors th an others. And, when factoring in deve lopment, that can be stated in a way 
that also includes history—not only are some of us exposed to more stressors than others, but if we are exposed to 
some awful stressors early in life, forever after we will be more vulnerable to whatev er subsequent stressors are 
thrown at us. This is the essence of allo static load, of wear and t ear, where exposure to severe stress produces rents of 
vulnerability.
So differential incidences of depressi on can be explained by di fferences in the amount of stress, and/or in stress 
histories. But even for the same stressor s and the same history of stress, some of  us are more vulnerable than others. 
Why should some of us succumb more readily?
To begin to make sense of this, we have to invert that question, to state it in a more world-weary way. How is it that 
any of us manage to avoid getting depressed? All things considered, this can be an awful world, and at times it must 
seem miraculous that any of us resist despair.
The answer is that we have built into us a biology of recove ring from the effects of stress  that provoke depression. As 
we've seen, stress and glucocorticoids can bring about many of  the same alterations in neurotransmitter systems that 
have been implicated in depression. One of the best documented links is that st ress depletes norepinephrine. No one is 
sure exactly why the depletion occurs, although it probably has something to do with norepinephrine being consumed 
faster than usual (rather than its being made more slowly than usual).
Critically, not only does stress deplete norepinephrine, bu t it simultaneously initiates the gradual synthesis of more 
norepinephrine. At the same time that norepinephrine content is plummeting, shortly after the onset of stress, the brain 
is starting to make more of the key
enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase, which synthesizes norepinephrine. Both glucocorticoids and, indirectly, the autonomic 
nervous system play a role in inducing the new tyrosine hydroxylase. The main point is that, in most of us, stress may 
cause depletion of norepinephrine, but only transiently. We 're about to see there are si milar mechanisms related to 
serotonin. Thus, while everyday stressors  bring about some of the neurochemical  changes linked to depression along 
with some of the symptoms—we feel "blue"—at the same time, we are alr eady building in the mechanisms of 
recovery. We get over it, we put things behind us, we get things in perspective, we move on with our lives ... we heal 
and we recover.
So, given the same stressors and stress hi stories, why do only some of us get depressed? There is increasing evidence 
for a reasonable answer, which is that the biology of vu lnerability to depression is that you don't recover from 
stressors very well. Back to that findin g of the different versions of "gene Z, " where one version in creases your risk 
for depression, but only when coupled with a history of major stressors. The gene turns out to code for a protein called 
the serotonin transporter (also known as 5-HTT, derived from the fact that the chemical ab breviation for serotonin is 
"5-HT"). In other words, the pump that causes the reuptake of serotonin from the synapse. Whose actions are inhibited 
by drugs like Prozac, which are SSRIs— selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors . Aha. A whole bunch of pieces here 
are teetering on the edge of falling into place. The diff erent allelic versions of the 5- HTT gene differ as to how good 
they are at removing serotonin from the synapse. And where does stress fit in? Glucocorticoids help regulate how 
much 5-HTT is made from the gene. And, critically, glucocorticoids differ in how good they are at doing that, 
depending on which allelic version of the 5-HTT gene you have. This allows us to come up with a working model of Page 157 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmdepression risk. It is a simplistic one,  and a more realistic version must in corporate the likelih ood of scads more 
examples of interactions among genes an d stressors than simply this stress/gluc ocorticoids/5-HTT story* Nonetheless, 
maybe what occurs is something like this: a major stressor comes along and produces some of the neurochemical 
changes of depression. The more prior history of stress you have , especially early in life, the less of a stressor it takes 
to produce those neurochemical changes. But the same stress signal, namely glucocorticoids, alters norepinephrine 
synthesis, serotonin
* For example, there is probably an equivalent story concerning stress, glucocorticoids, and the genetics of tyrosine hydroxyla se.
trafficking, and so on, starting you on the road toward recovery. Unless your genetic makeup means that those 
recovery steps don't work very well.
This is the essence of the interaction between biology and experience. Take a sufficien tly severe stressor and, as 
studies suggest, virtually all of us will fall into desp air. No degree of neurochemi cal recovery mechanisms can 
maintain your equilibrium in the face of some of the nightmares that life can produ ce. Conversely, have a life 
sufficiently free of stress, and even wi th a genetic predisposition, you may be safe—a car whose brakes are faulty 
presents no danger if it is never driven. But in between  those two extremes, it is the interaction between the 
ambiguous experiences that life throws at us and the biol ogy of our vulnerabilities and resiliencies that determines 
which of us fall prey to this awful disease.
15
PERSONALITY, TEMPERAMENT, AND THEIR STRESS-RELATED 
CONSEQUENCES
The main point of chapter 13 was that psychological factor s can modulate stress-responses. Perceive yourself in a
given situation to have expressive outlets, control, and predictive information, for example, and you are less
likely to have a stress-response. What this chapter explores is the fact that  people habitually differ in how they 
modulate their stress-responses with psychological variable s. Your style, your temperament, your personality have 
much to do with whether you regularly perceive opportunit ies for control or safety si gnals when they are there, 
whether you consistently interpret am biguous circumstances as implying good news or bad, whether you typically 
seek out and take advantage of social support. Some folks are good at modulating stress in these ways, and others are 
terrible. These fall within the larger cat egory of what Richard Davidson has called "affective style." And this turns out 
to be a very important factor in understanding why some people are more prone toward stress-related diseases than 
others.
We start with a study in contrasts. Co nsider Gary. In the prime of his life, he is, by most estimates, a success. He's 
done okay for himself materially, and he's never come close to going hungry He's also had more than his share of 
sexual partners. And he has done extremely well in the hierarchical world that dominates most of his waking hours. 
He's good at what he does, and what he does is compete—he's already Numb er 2 and breathing down the neck of 
Number 1, who's grown complacen t and a bit slack. Things are goo d and likely to get better.
But you wouldn't call Gary satisfied. In fact, he never really has been. Everything is a battle to him. The mere 
appearance of a rival
rockets him into a tensely agitated state,  and he views every interaction with a potential comp etitor as an in-your-face 
personal provocation. He views virtually every interaction with a distrustful vigilance. Not surprisingly, Gary has no 
friends to speak of. His subordinates give him a wide, f earful berth because of his tenden cy to take any frustration out 
on them. He behaves the same toward Kathleen, and barely knows their daughter Caitland—this is the sort of guy who 
is completely indifferent to the cutest of  infants. And when he looks at all he's accomplished, all he can think of is that 
he is still not Number 1.
Gary's profile comes with some physiolo gical correlates. Elevated basal glucocorticoid levels—a constant low-grade 
stress-response because life is one big stressor for him. An immune system that you wouldn't wish on your worst 
enemy. Elevated resting blood pressure, an unhealthy ratio of  "good" to "bad" cholesterol, and already the early stages 
of serious atherosclerosis. And, looking ahead  a bit, a premature d eath in late middle-age.
Contrast that with Kenneth. He's also  prime-aged and Number 2 in his world, but he got there through a different 
route, one reflecting the differ ent approach to life that he's had ever si nce he was a kid. Someone caustic or jaded 
might dismiss him as merely being a politician, but he's basically a good guy—works well with others, comes to their Page 158 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmaid, and they in turn to  his. Consensus builder, team play er, and if he's ever frustrated about anything, and it isn't all 
that certain he ever is, he certainly doesn't take it out on those around him.
A few years ago, Kenneth was poised for a move to the Number 1 spot, but he did something extraordinary—he 
walked away from it all. Ti mes were good enough that he wasn't going to starve, and he  had reached the realization 
that there were things in life more important than fighting your way up the hierarchy. So he's spending time with his 
kids, Sam and Allan, making sure they grow up safe and healthy. He has a best friend in their mother, Barbara, and 
never gives a thought to what he's turned his back on.
Not surprisingly, Kenneth has a physiological profile quite different from Gary's, basically the opposite on every 
stress-related measure, and enjoys a robust good health. He is destined to live to a ripe old age, surrounded by kids, 
grandkids, and Barbara.
Normally, with these sorts of profiles, you try to protect the privacy of the individuals involved, but I'm going to 
violate that by including pictures of Gary and Kenneth on the next page. Check them out.
Isn't that something? Some baboons are driven sharks, avoid ulcers by giving them, see the world as full of water 
holes that are half empty.
"Gary."
"Kenneth" (with infant).
And some baboons are the opposite in every way. Talk to any pet owner, and they will give ardent testimonials as to 
the indelible personality of their parakeet, turtle, or bunny. And they'd usually be at least somewhat right—people 
have published papers on animal personality. Some have co ncerned lab rats. Some rats have an aggressive proactive 
style for dealing with stressors—put a ne w object in their cage and they bury it in the bedding. These animals don't 
have much in the way of a glucocorticoid stress response. In contrast, there are reactiv e animals who respond to a 
menacing by avoiding it. They have a more marked glucocorticoid stress-response. And then there are studies about Page 159 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmstress-related personality differences in  geese. There's even been a great st udy published about sunfish personalities 
(some of whom are shy, and some of whom are outgoing social  butterflies). Animals are st rongly individualistic, and 
when it comes to primates, there are as tonishing differences in their personal ities, temperaments, and coping styles. 
These differences carry some distinctive physiological consequences and disease risks related to stress. This is not the 
study of what external stressors have to do with health. This  is, instead, the study of the impact on health of how an 
individual perceives, responds to, and copes with those external stressors. The lessons learned from some of these 
animals can be strikingly relevant to humans.
STRESS AND THE SUCCESSFUL PRIMATE
If you are interested in understanding the stressors in our everyday lives and how some fo lks cope with them better 
than others, study a troop of baboons in the Serengeti—big, smart, long-lived, highly social animals who live in 
groups of from 50 to 1 50. The Serengeti is a great place for them to li ve, offering minimal prob lems with predators, 
low infant-mortality rates, easy access to  food. Baboons there work perhaps four  hours a day, fora ging through the 
fields and trees for fruits, tubers, and ed ible grasses. This has a critical implication for me, which has made them the 
perfect study subjects when I've snuck aw ay from my laboratory to the Serenget i during the summers of the past two 
decades. If baboons are spending only fo ur hours a day filling their stomachs, that  leaves them with eight hours a day 
of sunlight to be vile to one another. Social competition, coalitions forming to gang up on other animals, big males in 
bad moods beating up on someone smaller, snid e gestures behind someone's back—just like us.
I am not being facetious. Think about some of the themes of the first chapter—how few of us are getting our ulcers 
because we have to walk ten miles a day looking for grubs to eat, how few of us become hypertensive because we are 
about to punch it out with someone over the last gulp from the water hole. We are ecologically buffered and privileged enough to be stressed main ly over social and psychological ma tters. Because the ecosystem of the 
Serengeti is so ideal for savanna baboons, they have th e same luxury to make each ot her sick with social and 
psychological stressors. Of course, like ours , theirs is a world filled with affilia tion, friendships, relatives who support 
each other; but it is a vicious ly competitive society as well . If a baboon in the Serengeti is miserable, it is almost 
always because another baboon has worked  hard and long to bring ab out that state. Individual  styles of coping with 
the social stress appear to be critical . Thus, one of the things I set out to test was whether such styles predicted 
differences in stress-related physiology and disease. I watc hed the baboons, collected de tailed behavioral data, and 
then would anesthetize the animals u nder controlled conditions, using a blowgun. Once they were unconscious, I 
could measure their glucocorticoid levels, their ability to make antibodies, their cholesterol profiles, and so on, under 
basal conditions and a range of stressed conditions.*
* The controls are daunting. You have to find an anesthetic that  does not distort the levels of hormones that you are measuring . You have to dart 
every animal at the same time
(continued)
The cases of Gary and Kenneth already give us a sense of how different male baboons can be. Two males of similar 
ranks may differ dramatically as to how readily they form  coalitional partnerships with other males, how much they 
like to groom females, whether they play with kids, whether they sulk after losing a fight or go beat up on someone 
smaller. Two students, Justina Ray and Charles Virgin, and I analyzed years of behavioral  data to try to formalize 
different elements of style and personality among these animals. We fo und some fascinating correlations between 
personality styles and physiology.
Among males who were in the higher-ranking half of the hi erarchy, we observed a clus ter of behavioral traits 
associated with low resting gluc ocorticoid levels independent of their specific ranks. Some of these traits were related 
to how males competed with one another. The first trait was whether a male could tell the difference between a 
threatening and a neutral inter action with a rival. How does one spot this in a baboon? Look at a particular male and 
two different scenarios. First scenario: along comes his worst rival, sits down next to him, and makes a threatening 
gesture. What does our male subject do next? Alternativ e scenario: our guy is sitting there, his worst rival comes 
along and ... wanders off to the next field to fall asleep. What does our guy do in this situation?
Some males can tell the difference between these situations. Threatened from a fo ot away, they get agitated, vigilant, 
prepared; when they instead s ee their rival is taking a nap, they keep do ing whatever they were  doing. They can tell 
that one situation is bad news, the other is meaningless. Bu t some males get agitated even when their rival is taking a 
nap across the field—the sort of  situation that happens five times a day. If a male baboon can't tell the difference 
between the two
(continued) of day to control for daily fluc tuations in hormone levels. If you want to  get a first blood sample in which hormon e levels reflect basal, 
nonstressed conditions, you can't dart someon e who is sick or injured or who has had a fight or intercourse that day. For some of the cholesterol 
studies, I could not dart anyone who had eaten in the preceding twelve hours. If you are trying to measure resting hormone leve ls, you can't spend 
all morning making the same animal nervous as  you repeatedly try to dart him; instead  you get one shot, and you can't let him s ee it coming. 
Finally, once you dart him, you have to obtain the first blood samp le rapidly, before hormone leve ls change in response to the dart. Quite a thing to 
do with your college education.Page 160 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhy are these studies exclusively about male s? Because of the difficulties inherent in  trying to dart and anesthetize females. At any given time in 
this baboon population, approximately 80 pe rcent of the adult females are either pregnant or nursing their young. You don't wan t to dart a female 
who is pregnant, as there is a good chance that the anesthesia will enda nger the pregnancy. And you don't want to dart a female  who has a 
youngster holding on to her in a panic as she goes down, or spe nds a day badly endangered for lack  of milk while Mom is anesthe tized.
situations, on the average his resting glucocorticoid levels  are twice as high as those of the guy who can tell the 
difference—after correcting for rank as a variable. If a rival napping across the field throws a male into turmoil, the 
latter's going to be in a constant st ate of stress. No wonder his glucocorticoid levels are elevated. These stressed 
baboons are similar to the hyperreact ive macaque monkeys that Jay Kaplan  has studied. As you will recall from 
chapter 3, these are individuals who re spond to every social provocation with an overactivation of their stress-
response (the sympathetic nervous system) and carry the greater cardiovascular risk.
Next variable: if the situation really is threatening (the rival's a foot away and making  menacing moves), does our 
male sit there passively and wait for the fight, or does he take control of the situation and strike first? Males who sit 
there passively, abdicating control, have much higher glucoc orticoid levels than the take -charge types, after rank is 
eliminated as a factor in the analys is. We see the same pattern in low- ranking as well as high-ranking males.
A third variable: after a fight, can the baboon tell whether he won or lost? Some guys are gr eat at it; they win a fight, 
and they groom their best friend. They lose a fight, and they b eat up someone smaller. Other baboons react the same 
way regardless of outcome; they can't tell if life is improving or worsening. The baboon who can't tell the difference 
between winning and losing has much higher glucocorticoid levels, on average, than the guys who can, independent 
of rank.
Final variable: if a male has lost a fight, what does he do  next? Does he sulk by himself, groom someone, or beat 
someone up? Discourag-ingly, it turns out that the males who are most likely to go beat on someone—thus displaying 
displaced aggression—have lower glucocorti coid levels, again after rank is elimin ated as a variable. This is true for 
both subordinate baboons and the high-ranking ones.
Thus, after factoring out rank, lower basal glucocorticoid levels are found in males who are best at telling the 
difference between threatening and neutral interactions; who ta ke the initiative if the situation clearly is threatening; 
who are best at telling whether they won or lost; and, in th e latter case, who are most likely to make someone else pay 
for the defeat. This echoes some of th e themes from the chapter on psychological stress. The males who were coping 
best (at least by this endocrine measure) had high degrees of social control (initiating the fights), predictability (they 
can accurately assess whether a situation is  threatening, whether an outcome is good news), and outlets for frustration 
(a tendency to give rather than get ul cers). Remarkably, this style is stable over the years of  these individuals' lives, 
and carries a
big payoff—males with this cluster of low-glucocorticoid tr aits remain high ranking signi ficantly longer than average.
Our subsequent studies have shown another set of traits that also predict low basal glucocorticoid levels. These traits 
have nothing to do with how males compete with one another. Instead, they are related to patterns of social affiliation. 
Males who spent the most time grooming females not in heat (not of immediate sexual interest—just good old 
platonic friends), who are groomed by them the most frequently, who spend the most time playing with the young—
these are the low-glucocortico id guys. Put most basically (and not at all anthropomor-phicall y), these are male 
baboons who are most capable of developing friendships. This finding is remarkably similar to those discussed in 
previous chapters regarding the protectiv e effects of social affili ation against stress-related disease in humans. And as 
will be discussed in the final chapter of this book, this clus ter of personality traits is also stable over time and comes 
with a distinctive payoff as well—a male baboon's equivalent of a successful old age.
Thus, among some male baboons, there are at least two routes for winding up with elevated basal glucocorticoid 
levels, independent of social rank—an inability to keep competition in perspective an d social isolation. Stephen 
Suomi at the National Institutes of Heal th has studied rhesus monkeys and iden tified another personality style that 
should seem familiar, which carries some  physiological correlates. About 20 percent of rhesus  are what he calls "high-
reactors." Just like the baboons who find a rival napping to be an arousing threat, these individual monkeys see 
challenges everywhere. But in their case , the response to the perceived threat is a shrinking timidity. Put them into a 
novel environment that other rhesus monkey s would find to be a stimulating place to explore, and they  react with fear, 
pouring out glucocorticoids. Place them with new peers, an d they freeze with anxiety—sh y and withdrawn, and again 
releasing vast amounts of glucocorticoids. Separate them fro m a loved one, and they are at ypi-cally likely to collapse 
into a depression, complete with excessive glucocorticoi ds, overactivation of the symp athetic nervous system, and 
immunosuppression. These appear to be lifelong styles of dealing with the world, beginning early in infancy.
From where do these various primate pe rsonalities arise? When it comes to the baboons, I'll never know. Male 
baboons change troops at puberty, often moving dozens of miles before finding an adult troop to join. It is virtually 
impossible to track the same individuals from birth to adulthood, so I have no idea what their childhoods were like, 
whether their mothers were permissive or  stern, whether they were forced toPage 161 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmtake piano lessons, and so on. But Suomi has done eleg ant work that indicates both  genetic and environmental 
components to these personality differ ences. For example, he ha s shown that an infant monkey has a significant 
chance of sharing a personality trait with  its father, despite the formation of social groups in which the father is not 
present—a sure hint at a heritable, genetic component. In  contrast, the high-reactivity personality in these monkeys 
can be completely prevented by fosterin g such animals early in life to atypical ly nurturing mothers—a powerful vote 
for environmental factors bui lt around mothering style.
Broadly, these various studies suggest two ways that a primat e's personality style might lead down the path to stress-
related disease. In the first way, ther e's a mismatch between the magnitude of the stressors they are conf ronted with 
and the magnitude of their stress-response—the most neutral of circumstances is perceived as a threat, demanding 
either a hostile, confrontational response (as with some of my baboons and Kaplan's macaques) or an anxious 
withdrawal (as with some of Suomi's monkeys). At the most extreme they even react to a situation that most certainly 
does not constitute a stressor (for exam ple, winning a fight) the same way as if it were a stressful misery (losing one). 
In their second style of dysfunction, th e animal does not take advantage of th e coping responses that might make a 
stressor more manageable—they don't grab the minimal control available in a tough situation, they don't make use of 
effective outlets when the going gets tough, and they lack social support.
It would seem relatively straightforward to pull together some sound psychotherapeutic advice for these unhappy 
beasts. But in reality, it's hopeless. Baboons and macaque s get distracted during therapy sessions, habitually pulling 
books off the shelves, for example; they don't know the days  of the week and thus consta ntly miss appointments; they 
eat the plants in the waiting room, and so on. Thus, it might be more useful to apply those same insights to making 
sense of some humans who are prone toward  an overactive stress-response and incr eased risk of stress-related disease.
THE HUMAN REALM: A CAUTIONARY NOTE
There are, by now, some fairly impressive and convincing studies linking human personality types with stress-related 
diseases. Probably the best place to start,  however, is with a bit of caution abou t some reported links that, I suspect, 
should be taken with a grain of salt.
I've already noted some skepticism about early psychoanalytic theorizing that linked certain personality types with 
colitis (see chapter 5). Another example concerns miscarri ages and abortions. Chapter 7 reviewed the mechanisms by 
which stress can cause the loss of a pregnancy, and one hardly needs to have experienced that personally to have an 
inkling of the trauma involved. Thus, you can imagine the particular agony for women wh o miscarry repeatedly, and 
the special state of misery for those wh o never get a medical explanation for the problem—no expert has a clue what's 
wrong. Into that breach have charge d people who have attempted to uncove r personality traits common to women 
labeled as "psychogenic aborters."
Some researchers have identified one subgroup of women with repeated "psychogenic " abortions (accounting for 
about half the cases) as being "retarded in their psycholo gical development." They are characterized as emotionally 
immature women, highly dependent on their husbands, who on some unconscious level view the impending arrival of 
the child as a threat to their own childlike relationship with  their spouse. Another personality type identified, at the 
opposite extreme, are women who are characterized as being assertive and inde pendent, who really don't want to have 
a child. Thus, a common theme in the tw o supposed profiles is an unconscious desire not to have the child—either 
because of competition for the spouse's  attention or because of reluctance to  cramp their independent lifestyles.
Many experts are skeptical about the studies behind these ch aracterizations, however. The fi rst reason harks back to a 
caveat I aired early in the book: a diag nosis of "psychogenic" anything (impotency, amenorrhea, abortion, and so on) 
is usually a diagnosis by exclusion. In other words, the ph ysician can't find any disease or organic cause, and until one 
is discovered, the disorder gets tossed into the psychogeni c bucket. This may mean that, legitimately, it is heavily 
explained by psychological variables, or it may simply mean  that the relevant hormone, neurotransmitter, or genetic 
abnormality has not yet been discovered. Once it is discover ed, the psychogenic disease is  magically transformed into 
an organic problem—"Oh, it wasn't your personality after all. " The area of repeated aborting  seems to be one that is 
rife with recent biological in sights—in other words, if so many of last  decade's psychogenic aborters now have an 
organic explanation for their malady, that  trend is likely to continue. So be skeptical of any cu rrent "psychogenic" 
label.
Another difficulty is that these studies are all retrospectiv e in design: the researchers examine the personalities of 
women after they have had repeated abortio ns. A study may thus cite the case of a
woman who has had three miscarriages in a row, noting that she is emotionally withdrawn and dependent on her 
husband. But because of the na ture of the research design , one can't tell whether thes e traits are a cause of the 
miscarriages or a response to them—thr ee successive miscarriages could well ex act a heavy emotional price, perhaps 
making the subject withdrawn and more dependent on her husband. In order to study the phenomenon properly, one 
would need to look at personality profiles of women before they become pregnant, to see if these traits predict who is 
going to have repeated miscarriages. To my knowledge, this kind of study has not yet been carried out.Page 162 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAs a final problem, none of the studies provides any reas onable speculation as to how a particular personality type 
may lead to a tendency not to carry fetuses to term . What are the mediating phy siological mech anisms? What 
hormones and organ functions are disrupt ed? The absence of any science in that  area makes me pretty suspicious of 
the claims. Psychological stressors can increase the risk of a miscarriage, but although there is  precedent in the 
medical literature for thinking that having a certain type of personality is associated with an increased risk for 
miscarriages, scientists are far from being able to agr ee on what personality is associated, let alone whether the 
personality is a cause or cons equence of the miscarriages.
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS AND ABNORMAL STRESS-RESPONSES
A number of psychiatric disorders involve personalities, role s, and temperaments that are associated with distinctive 
stress-responses. We have seen an example of this in th e previous chapter on depression— about half of depressives 
have resting glucocorticoid levels that are dramatically higher  than in other people, often su fficiently elevated to cause 
problems with metabolism or immunity. Or in some cases, depressives are unable to turn off glucocorticoid secretion, 
their brains being less sensitive to a shut-off signal.
A theme in the previous section on some troubled nonhuman pr imates is that there is a discrepancy between the sorts 
of stressors they are exposed to and the coping responses th ey come up with. Learned helplessness, which we saw to 
be an underpinning of depression, appears to be another ex ample of such discrepancy. A challenge occurs, and what is 
the response of a depressive individual? "I can't, it's too much, why bother doing anything, it isn't going to work 
anyway, nothing I do ever works...." The discrepancy here is that in the
face of stressful challenges, depressives don't even attempt to mount a coping response. A different type of 
discrepancy is seen with people who are anxiety-prone.
Anxiety Disorders
What is anxiety? A sense of disquiet, of disease, of the sands constantly shifting menacingly beneath your feet—where constant vigilance is the only ho pe of effectively protecting yourself.
Anxiety disorders come in  a number of flavors. To na me just a few: generalized an xiety disorder is just that—
generalized—whereas phobias focus on sp ecific things. In people with panic attacks, the anxiety boils over with a 
paralyzing, hyperventilating sense of crisis that causes massive activation of the sympathetic nervous system. In 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, the anxiety buries and busies it self in endless patterns of cal ming, distracting ritual. In 
post-traumatic stress disord er, the anxiety can be tr aced to a specific trauma.
In none of these cases is the anxiety ab out fear. Fear is the vigilance and th e need to escape from something real. 
Anxiety is about dread and foreboding and your imagination running away with you. Much as with depression, 
anxiety is rooted in a cognitive distortion. In this case,  people prone toward anxiety overestimate risks and the 
likelihood of a bad outcome.
Unlike depressives, the anxiety-prone person is still attempting to mobilize coping responses. But the discrepancy is 
the distorted belief that stressors are everywhere and perpetual, and that the only hope for safety is constant 
mobilization of coping responses. Life consists of the concrete, agitated present of solving a problem that someone 
else might not even consider to exist.*
Awful. And immensely stressful. Not surp risingly, anxiety disorders are associated with chro nically overactive stress-
responses, and with increased risk of ma ny of the diseases that fill the pages of this book (anxiety-prone rats, for 
example, have a shortened life span). However, glucocortico id excess is not the usual response. Instead, it's too much 
sympathetic activation, an overabun dance of circulating catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine).
We have now seen some interesting contrasts between glucocorticoids and the catech olamines (epinephrine and 
norepinephrine). Chapter 2 emphasized how the former defend you against stressors by
* Emphasizing the concrete nature of anxiet y, the psychoanalyst Anna Ar agno has written, "Anxiety wi pes out the space wherein t he symbol is 
born."
handing out guns from the gun locker within seconds, in contrast to glucocorticoids, which defend you by 
constructing new weapons over the course of minutes to hours. Or there can be an elaboratio n of this time course, in 
which catecholamines mediate the respon se to a current stressor while glucoc orticoids mediate preparation for the 
next stressor. When it comes to psychiat ric disorders, it seems that increases in  the catecholamines have something to 
do with still trying to cope and the effort that involv es, where overabundance of gluc ocorticoids seems more of a 
signal of having given up on attempting to cope. You can show this with a lab rat. Rats, being nocturnal creatures, 
don't like bright li ghts, are made anxious by them. Pu t a rat in a cage whose edges are dark, just the place a rat likes to 
hunker down. But the rat is really hungry and there's some wonderful food in the middle of the cage, under a bright Page 163 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmlight. Massive anxiety—the rat starts toward the food, pulls b ack, again and again, frantically tries to figure ways to 
the food that avoid the light. This is anxiety, a disorganized  attempt to cope, and this phase is dominated by 
catecholamines. If it goes on for too long, the animal gives up , just lies there, in the shad ed perimeter. And that is 
depression, and it is dominated by glucocorticoids.
The Biology of Anxiety
The main point of this chapter is to explore how different psychiatric disorders and personality styles involve dealing poorly with stress, and we've just seen how anxiety fits the bill. But it is worth looking at the biology of the disease a 
bit.
There are some things that mammals get anxious about that are innate. Bright lights for a rat. Being dangled up in the 
air if you are a terrestrial creature. Havi ng your breathing obstructed for most any animal. But most things that make 
us anxious are learned. Maybe because they are associated with some trauma , or maybe because we've generalized 
them based on their similarity to something associated wi th a trauma. Organisms are pr edisposed to learn some of 
those associations more readily than others—humans and spiders, for example,  or monkeys and snakes. But we can 
learn to be anxious about utterly novel things—as we speed up to get across a suspension bridge quickly, wondering if 
the guy in that panel truck is from Al-Qaeda.
This is a different type of learning than what we focused on in chapter 10, which concerned the hippocampus and 
declarative learning. This is implicit l earning, where a certain autonomic respons e in your body has been conditioned. 
Thus, consider a woman who has suffered a traumatic  assault, where her brain has become conditioned
to speed up her heart every time she s ees a similar-looking man. Pavlovian learning—ring the bell associated with 
food, and the brain has learned to activ ate salivary glands; see a certain type of face, and the brain has learned to 
activate the sympathetic nervous system . The conditioned memory can be elicite d without you even being conscious 
of it. That woman finds herself in a crowded party, having  a fine time, when suddenly the anxiety is there, she's 
gasping, heart racing, and she hasn't a clue why. It is not un til a few seconds later that she realizes that the man talking 
just behind her has an accent just like the man. The body responds before there is  consciousness of the similarity.
As we saw in chapter 10, while mild transient stress enhances  declarative learning, prolonged  or severe stress disrupts 
it. But in the case of this pre-consciou s, implicit, autonomic learning, any type  of stress enhances it. For example, 
make a loud sound and a lab rat will have a startle respon se—in a few milliseconds, its muscles tense. Stress the rat 
beforehand with any type of stressor and the startle response is
exaggerated and more likely to become a habitual, conditioned response. Same in us.Page 164 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAs mentioned, this is outside the realm of the hippocampus , that wonderfully rational conduit of declarative memory, 
helping us recall someone's birthday. Instead, anxiety and f ear conditioning are the province of a related structure, the 
amygdala.* To begin to make sense of its function, you have to look at brain areas that project to the amygdala, and 
where the amygdala projects to, in turn. One route to the amygdala is from pain pathways. Which brings us back to 
chapter 9 and how there's pain and then  there's subjective pain interpretation.  The amygdala is about the latter. The 
structure also gets sensory information.  Remarkably, the amygdala gets sensory information before that information 
reaches the cortex and causes conscious awareness of the sensation—the woman's heart races before she is even aware 
of the accent of the man. The amygdala ge ts information from  the autonomic nervous syst em. What's the significance 
of this? Suppose some ambiguous information is filtering in, and your amygdala is "deciding " whether this is a time to 
get anxious. If your heart is pounding and your stomach is in your throat, that input will bias the amygdala to vote for 
anxiety+ And, to complete the pi cture, the amygdala is immensely se nsitive to glucocorticoid signals.
The outputs from the amygdala make perfect sense—mostly projections to the hypothalamus and related outposts, 
which initiate the cascade of glucocorticoid release and ac tivate the sympathetic nervous system.++ And how does the 
amygdala communicate?—by using CRH as a neurotransmitter.
Some of the most convincing work implicating the amygdala in anxiety comes from brain-imaging studies. Put people 
in a scanner, flash various pictures, see what parts of the brain are activated in  response to each. Show a scary face, 
and the amygdala lights up. Make
* The amygdala is also all about aggression. It is hard to unde rstand why organisms are aggressive outside of the context of un derstanding that they 
are anxious or fearful.
+ An exciting clinical implication of this can be found in the recent work of Larry Ca hill and Roger Pitman of Harvard. They rep ort that if you 
block the sympathetic nervous system in someone who has just su ffered a major trauma (with a drug from chapter 3 called a beta- blocker), you 
decrease the odds of the person developing post-traumatic stre ss disorder. What's the rationale ? Decrease the sympathetic signa l to the amygdala, 
and the amygdala is less likely to deci de that this is an even t that should provoke w ild arousal forever after.
++ So an aroused amygdala activates the symp athetic nervous system and, as  we saw in the previous pa ragraph, an aroused sympath etic nervous 
system increases the odds of the amygdala activating. Anxiety can feed on itself.
the pictures subliminal—flash them for thousandths of a second, too fast to be consciously seen (and too fast to 
activate the visual cortex), and the am ygdala lights up.*
How does the functioning of the amygdala relate to anxiety? People with anxiety disorders have exaggerated startle 
responses, see menace that others don't.  Give people some reading task, where they are flashed a series of nonsense 
words and have to quickly detect the real ones. Everyone slows down slightly for a menacing word, but people with 
anxiety disorders slow down even more. Commensurate with  these findings, the amygdala in such a person shows the 
same hyperreactivity. A picture that is so rt of frightening, that do esn't quite activate the amy gdala in a control subject, 
does so in an anxious person. A frightening picture that is flashed up too briefly to be even noted subliminally in a 
control subject does the trick to the amy gdala in someone who is anxious. No wonder the sympathetic nervous system 
then races—alarms are always  going off in the amygdala.
Why does the amygdala work differently in someone who is anxious? Some am azing research in recent years shows 
how this might work. As we saw in chapter 10, major stressors and glucocorticoids disrupt hippocampal function—
the synapses aren't able to  do that long-term potentiation business, a nd the dendritic processes in neurons shrink. 
Remarkably, stress and glucocorticoids do just the opposite in the amygdala—synapses become more excitable, 
neurons grow more of the cables that co nnect the cells to each other. And if you  artificially make  the amygdala of a 
rat more excitable, the animal shows an anxiety-like disorder afterward.
Joseph LeDoux of New York University, who pretty much put the amygdala on the map when it comes to anxiety, has 
constructed a remarkable model out of these findings. Suppose a major trauma tic stressor occurs, of a sufficient 
magnitude to disrupt hippocampal function while enhancing amygdaloid function. At some later point, in a similar 
setting, you have an anxious, autonomic state, agitated and fearful, and yo u haven't a clue why—this is because you 
never consolidated memories of the ev ent via your hippocampus while your amygdala-mediated autonomic pathways 
sure as hell remember. This is a version of free-floating anxiety.
* Some recent studies that I find truly un settling show that if you flas h a picture of a face of someone from a different race,  the amygdala tends to 
light up. Endless studies n eed to be done looking at what so rt of face is flashed and what sort of person is observing it. But in the meantime, just 
think about the implica tions of that finding.
TYPE A AND THE ROLE OF UPHOLSTERY  IN CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY
A number of proposed links between personality and cardiovasc ular disease have been repo rted. Amid these, there is 
one proposed connection between personal ity and heart disease that has become so well-known that it has suffered the 
ultimate accolade—namely, being distorte d beyond recognition in many people 's minds (usually winding up being Page 165 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmascribed to the most irritating behavioral  trait that you want to complain about  in someone else, or indirectly brag 
about in yourself). I'm talking being "Type A."
Two cardiologists, Meyer Friedman an d Ray Rosenman, coined the term Type A in the early 1960s to describe a 
collection of traits that they found in some individuals. They didn't descri be these traits in terms related to stress (for 
example, defining Type-A people as those who responded to ne utral or ambiguous situations as if they were stressful), 
although I will attempt to do that reframing below. In stead, they characterized Type-A people as immensely 
competitive, overachiev-ing, time-pressured , impatient, and hostile. People with that profile, they reported, had an 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
This was met with enormous skepticism in the field. You're  some 1950s Ozzie-and-Harriet cardiologist and you think 
about heart valves and circulating lipids, not about how so meone deals with a slow line  at the supermarket. Thus, 
there was an initial tendency among many  in the field to view the link between  the behavior and the disease as the 
reverse of what Friedman and Rosenman proposed—getting heart disease might make some people act in a more 
Type-A manner. But Friedman and Rosenman did prospective studies that showed that th e Type A-ness preceded the 
heart disease. This finding made a splash, and by the 1980s, some of the biggest guns in cardiology convened, 
checked the evidence, and conc luded that being Type A carries at least as much cardiac risk as does smoking or 
having high cholesterol levels.
Everyone was delighted, and "Type A" entered common pa rlance. The trouble was, so on thereafter some careful 
studies failed to replicate the basic findings of Friedman and Rosenman. Suddenly, Type A wasn't looking good after 
all. Then, to add insult to injury, two studies showed th at once you had coronary hear t disease, being Type A was 
associated with better survival rates (in the notes at the end of the book, I discuss subtle ways to explain this finding).
By the late 1980s, the Type-A concept underwent some ma jor modifications. One was the recognition that personality 
factors are more predictive of heart disease when considering people who get their first
heart attack at an early age— by later years, the occurrence of a first heart attack is more about fats and smoking. 
Moreover, work by Red-ford Williams of Duke University conv inced most in the field that the key factor in the list of 
Type A-ish symptoms is the hostility. For example, when sc ientists reanalyzed some of the original Type-A studies 
and broke the constellation of traits into individual ones, hostility popped out as the only significant predictor of heart 
disease. The same result was found in studies of middle-aged doctors who had taken personality inventory tests 
twenty-five years earlier as an exercise  in medical school. And the same thing was found when looking at American 
lawyers, Finnish twins, Western Elect ric employees—a range of populations . As another example, there is a 
correlation between how hostile people are in ten Ameri can cities and the mortality rates due to cardiovascular 
disease.* These various studies have suggested that a hi gh degree of hostility predicts  coronary heart disease, 
atherosclerosis, hemorrhagic stroke, and higher rates of mortality with these diseases . Many of these studies, 
moreover, controlled for important variable s like age, weight, blood pressure, cholesterol levels, and smoking. Thus, it 
is unlikely that the hostility-h eart disease connection could be due to some other factor (for example, that hostile 
people are more likely to smoke, and the heart disease aris es from the smoking, not the hostility). More recent studies 
have shown that hostility is associated with a significant ove rall increase in mortality across all diseases, not just those 
of the heart.+
Friedman and colleagues stuck w ith an alternative view. They suggested that at the core of  the hostility is a sense of 
"time-pressured-ness"—"Can you believe that teller, how slowly he's working. I'm going to be here all day. I can't 
waste my life on some bank line. How did that kid know I was in a rush? I could kill him"—and that the core of being 
time-pressured is rampant insecurity. There's no time to savor anything you've accomplished,  let alone enjoy anything 
that anyone else has done, because you mu st rush off to prove yourse lf all over again, and tr y to hide from the world 
for another day what a fraud you are. Their work suggested th at a persistent sense of ins ecurity is, in fact, a better 
predictor of cardi ovascular profiles
* The hostility measures were self-rated in  a Gallup poll. What was the rank order of  the cities in terms of hostility? From hi ghest to lowest: 
Philadelphia, New York, Cl eveland, Des Moines, Chicago, Detr oit, Denver, Minneapolis , Seattle, Honolulu. This mostly makes sens e to me, except 
what's up with Des Moines?
+ Perhaps modifying a wonder ful aphorism to "I will le t no man degrade my soul or my health by making me hate him."Page 166 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmType A's in action. The photo on the left shows the early-morning parking pattern of a patient support group for Type-
A individuals with cardiovascular disease —everyone positioned for that quick ge taway that doesn't waste a second. 
On the right, the same scene later in the day.
than is hostility, although theirs appears to be a minority view in the field.
Insofar as hostility has something to do with your heart (whe ther as a primary factor or as a surrogate variable), it 
remains unclear which aspects of hostility are bad news. Fo r example, the study of lawyers suggested that overt 
aggressiveness and cynical mistrust we re critical—in other words, frequent open expression of the anger you feel 
predicts heart disease. In su pport of that, experimental studies show that the full expression of anger is a powerful 
stimulant of the cardiovascular system. By  contrast, in the reanalysis of the original Type-A data a particularly 
powerful predictor of heart disease was not only high degree s of hostility, but also the tendency not to express it when 
angry. This latter view is supported by some fascinating work by James Gross of Stanford University. Show 
volunteers a film clip that ev okes some strong emotion. Di sgust, for example (thanks to a gory view of someone's leg 
being amputated). They writhe in discomfort and distaste and, no surprise, show the physiological markers of having 
turned on their sympathetic nervous systems. Now, show so me other volunteers the same film clip but, beforehand, 
instruct them to try not to express their emotions ("so that if someone were watching, they'd have no idea what you 
were feeling"). Run them through the blood and guts, and, with them gripping the arms of their chairs and trying to 
remain stoic, and still, the sympatheti c activation becomes even gr eater. Repressing the expression of strong emotions 
appears to exaggerate the intensity of th e physiology that go es along with them.
Why would great hostility (of whatever variant) be bad for your h eart? Some of it is likely to be that roundabout realm 
of risk factors, in that hostile individuals are more likely to smoke, eat poorly, drink to
excess. Moreover, there are psychosocial variables, in that hostile people lack  social support because they tend to 
drive people away. But there ar e direct biological consequen ces to hostility as well. Su bjectively, we can describe 
hostile persons as those who get all worked up and angry over incidents that the rest of us would find only mildly 
provocative, if provocative at all. Similarly, their stress-res ponses switch into high gear in  circumstances that fail to 
perturb everyone else's. Give both hostile and non-hostile people a nonsocial stressor (like some math problems) and 
nothing exciting happens; everyone has roughly the same  degree of mild cardiovascu lar activation. But if you 
generate a situation with a social pr ovocation, the hostile pe ople dump more epinephrin e, norepinephrine, and 
glucocorticoids into their bloodstreams and wind up with higher blood pressures and a host of other undesirable 
features of their cardiovascula r systems. All sorts of social  provocations have been used in studies: the subjects may 
be requested to take a test and, during it, be repeatedly interrupted; or they may play a video game in which the 
opponent not only is rigged to win but acts like a disparag ing smart aleck. In these and other cases, the cardiovascular 
stress-responses of the non-hostile are relatively mild. But blood pressure goes through the roof in the hostile people. 
(Isn't it remarkable how si milar these folks are to Jay Kaplan's hy perreactive monkeys, with their exaggerated 
sympathetic responses to stressors and their increased risk of cardiovascular disease? Or to  my baboons, the ones who 
can't differentiate between th reatening and nonthreatening events in their world? Th ere are card-carrying Type-A 
individuals out there with tails.) Here is that discrepancy ag ain. For anxious people, life is  full of menacing stressors 
that demand vigilant coping responses. For the Type A, life is full of menacing stressors that demand vigilant coping 
responses of a particularly hostile nature. This is probably representa tive of the rest of their lives. If each day is filled 
with cardiovascular provocations that ev eryone else responds to as no big deal , life will slowly ha mmer away at the 
hearts of the hostile. An increased risk  of cardiovascular disease is no surprise.
A pleasing thing is that Type A-ness is not forever. If you reduce the hostility component in Type-A people through 
therapy (using some of the approaches that will be outlined in the final chapter), you reduce the risk for further heart 
disease. This is great news. I've noticed  that many health professionals who treat Type-A people are mostly trying to 
reform these folks. Basically, many Type -A people are abusive pains in the keister to lots of folks around them. When 
you talk to some of the Type-A experts, there is an odd tone between the lines that Type A-ness (of which many of 
them are admittedly pe rfect examples) is a
kind of ethical failing, and that the term is a fancied-up medical way of describing people who just aren't nice to 
others. Added to this is a tendency I've noticed for a lot of  the Type-A experts to be lay preachers, or descendants of 
clergy. That religious linkage will even sneak in the back door. I once talked wi th two leaders in the field, one an Page 167 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmatheist and the other agnostic, and when they tried to give me a sense of how they try to get through to Type-A 
subjects about their bad ways, they made use of a religi ous sermon.* I finally asked these two M.D.s an obvious 
question—were they in the business of blood vessels or souls?  Was the work that they do about heart disease or about 
ethics? And without a beat they both chos e ethics. Heart disease was just a wedge  for getting at the bigger issues. I 
thought this was wonderful. If it takes turning our coronary vessels into our ledgers of sin and reducing circulating 
lipids as an act of redemption in order to get people to be more decent to each other, more power to them.
Interior Decorating as Scientific Method
A final question about this field: How was Type-A behavi or discovered? We all know how scientists make their 
discoveries. There are the di scoveries in the bathtub (Archimedes and his discernment of the di splacement of water), 
discoveries in one's sleep (Kekule and his dream of carbons dancing in a ring to form benzene), discoveries at the 
symphony (our scientist, strained by overwork, is forced to the concert by a significant other; during a quiet 
woodwind section, there's the sud-
* I listened to a tape of this sermon, calle d "Back in the Box," by the Reverend John Ort-berg. It concerns an incident from hi s youth. His 
grandmother, saintly, kind, nurturant, also  happened to be a viciously competitive and skillful Monopoly player, and his summer  visits to her were 
littered with his defeats at the game. He described one year wh ere he practiced like mad, honed his Machiavellian instinct, dev eloped a ruthless 
jugular-gripping style, and finally  mopped up the board with her. After which, his grandmother rose and calmly put the pieces a way.
"You know," she said offhandedly, "this is a great game, but when it is all over with, the pieces just go back in  the box." Ama ss your property, your 
hotels . . . [the sermon takes off from there] . . . your wea lth, your accomplishments, your awards, your what-evers, and event ually it will all be over 
with and those pieces go back in the box. And a ll you are left with is  how you lived your life.
I listened to this tape while racing to beat red lights on my way to a 5:00 A.M. commut er train, Powerbook r eady so as not to m iss a moment of 
work on the train, eating breakfast one-handed  while driving, using the tim e to listen to this sermon on tape as research for t his chapter. And this 
sermon, whose trajectory was obvi ous from the first sentence and was filled with Jesus and other things I do not subscribe to, reduced me to tears.
den realization, the scribbled equation on the program notes, the rushed "Darling, I must leave this instant for the 
laboratory [accent on sec ond syllable, like in Masterpiece Theater]," with the rest being history). But every now and 
then someone else makes the discovery and comes and tells the scientist about it. And who is that someone? Very 
often someone whose role in the proces s could be summed up by an imaginary proverb that  will probably never end 
up embroidered on someone's pot holder: "If you want to know if the elephant at the zoo has a stomachache, don't ask 
the veterinarian, ask the cage cleaner." People who clean up  messes become attuned to circumstances that change the 
amount of mess there is. Back in the 1 950s that fact caused a guy to just miss changing the course of medical history.
I had the privilege of hearing the story from the horse's mouth, Dr. Meyer Friedman. It was the mid-1950s, Friedman 
and Rosenman had their successful cardi ology practice, and they were having an unexpected problem. They were 
spending a fortune having to reup-holster  the chairs in their waiting rooms. This is not the sort of issue that would 
demand a cardiologist's attention. Nonethel ess, there seemed to be no end of chai rs that had to be fixed. One day, a 
new upholsterer came in to see to the problem, took one lo ok at the chairs, and discover ed the Type A-cardiovascular 
disease link. "What the hell is wrong with your patients? People don't wear out chairs this way." It was only the front-
most few inches of the seat cushion and of  the padded armrests that were torn to  shreds, as if some very short beavers 
spent each night in the office craning thei r necks to savage the fronts of the ch airs. The patients in the waiting rooms 
all habitually sat on the edges of their seat s, fidgeting, clawing aw ay at the armrests.
The rest should have been history: up-swelling of music as the upholsterer is seized by the arms and held in a 
penetrating gaze— "Good heavens, man,  do you realize what you've just sa id?" Hurried conferences between the 
upholsterer and other cardiologists. Fren zied sleepless nights as teams of idea listic young upholster ers spread across 
the land, carrying the news of their discovery back to Upholstery/Cardiology Headquarters—"Nope, you don't see that 
wear pattern in the waiting-room chairs of the urologists, or the neurologists, or the oncologists, or the podiatrists, just 
the cardiologists. There's something diff erent about people who wind up with h eart disease"—and the field of Type-A 
therapy takes off.
Instead, none of that happened. Dr. Friedman sighs. A confession. "I didn't pay any attention to the man. I was too 
busy; it went in one ear and out the other." It wasn't until four or five years later thatPage 168 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmHow it all began . .. almost.
Dr. Friedman's formal research with hi s patients began to yield some hints, at which point there was the thunderclap 
of memory—Oh, my god, the upholsterer, remember that guy going on about the wear pattern? And to this day, no 
one remembers his name.*
* Since the last edition, it has been necessary to edit this sectio n into the past tense. Friedman , who was somewhat of a fathe r figure to me, passed 
away recently at age ninety-one. He was a man who, statistically , had so little time left, yet he had somehow beaten that ticki ng toxic clock, and he 
had all the time in the world. But he hadn 't turned into a con-tentless geezer—up un til his last days, he was seeing patients, running an institute at 
UCSF Medical Center, cranky about delays in his work, anticipating his next data, arguin g with competitors w ith a different tak e on the subject. 
Full of appetites, but with an appetite be ing its own reward and no rancor at the idea that it might not be fulfilled. And
(continued)
There have been a host of other studies concerning personalit y, temperament, and stress-rel ated physiology. Scientists 
have reported differences in stress-related immune function between optimists and pessimists. Others have shown 
higher glucocorticoid levels in shyer individuals in social settings. Others have considered neurosis as a factor. But 
let's consider one more subject, one that  is particularly interesting because it  concerns the last people on earth who 
you'd think were stressed.
WHEN LIFE CONSISTS OF NOTHING BUT SQUEEZING TIGHTLY
This chapter has discussed personality types associated w ith overactive stress-responses, and argued that a common 
theme among them is a discrepancy between  what sort of stressors life throws at  these folks and what sort of coping 
responses they come up with. This final section is about a newly recognized version of an overactive stress-response. 
And it's puzzling.
These are not people who are dealing with their stressors too passively, too persistently, too vigilantly, or with too 
much hostility. They don't appear to have all that many stre ssors. They claim they're not depressed or anxious, and the 
psychological tests they are given show th ey're right. In fact, they describe themselves as pretty happy, successful, and 
accomplished (and, according to  personality tests, they really are). Yet,  these people (compr ising approximately 5 
percent of the population) have chronically ac tivated stress-responses. What's their problem?Page 169 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmTheir problem, I think, is one that offers insight into an unexpected vulnerability of our human psyche. The people in 
question are said to
(continued) deeply engaged with the idea th at the world would be a more decent place if  something was done about those Type-A p eople—
Friedman was one of the two people I described a few paragraphs ba ck (along with his medical director, Bart Sparagon) who said he was in the 
business of ethics. Friedman would do some thing very interestin g and confessional with this. He was a gentle, courtly man who h ad been a driven, 
steamrolling son of a bitch before a heart a ttack in his fifties. He'd stand up in fr ont of a group of his patients, ruthless C EO Type-A barracudas with 
their first heart attacks at age forty-two, and say, "Look at me—n ot look at me, I used to be so Type A that I developed a bad heart, but look at me, I 
used to be so Type A that I was a bad person," and then he'd prove it—tales of people he was cu rt to, whose efforts he never no ticed, whose 
accomplishments he envied. And here he wa s at age ninety, metaphorically the ex-alcoh olic preacher who has been there. Cardiolo gy as 
redemption. It would be hard to make a choice between making th e world a healthier place or a kinder place. Here was a man who did both. I miss 
him.
Clifford Goodenough, Figure Walking in a Landscape, goldleaf tempera, oil on masonite, 1991.
have "repressive" personalities, and we all have met someone  like them. In fact, we usuall y regard these folks with a 
tinge of envy—"I wish I had their discipline; everything  seems to come so easily to them. How do they do it?"
These are the archetypal people who cross all their t's and dot all their i's. They describe themselves as planners who 
don't like surprises, who li ve structured, rule-bound lives —walking to work the same way each day, always wearing 
the same style of clothes—the sort of people who can tell you what they're having for lunch two weeks from 
Wednesday. Not surprisingly, they don't like ambiguity and stri ve to set up their world in black and white, filled with 
good or bad people, behaviors that are permitted or strictly forbidden. They keep a tight lid on their emotions. Stoic, 
regimented, hardworking, productive, solid folks who never stand out in a crowd (unless you begin to wonder at the 
unconventional nature of th eir extreme conventionality).
Some personality tests, pioneered by Richard Davidson, iden tify repressive individuals. For starters, as noted, the 
personality tests show that these people aren't depressed or  anxious. Instead, the tests re veal their need for social 
conformity, their dread of so cial disapproval, and their discomfort with ambiguity, as shown by the extremely high 
rates at which they agree with statemen ts framed as absolutes, statements f illed with "never" and "always." No gray 
tones here.
Intertwined with those character istics is a peculiar lack of emotional expression. The tests reveal how repressive 
people "inhibit negative affect"—no expressing of those messy, complicated emotions fo r them, and little recognition 
of those complications in others. For ex-
ample, ask repressors and non-represso rs to recall an experience associated with a specific stro ng emotion. Both 
groups report that particular emotion with equal intensity. However, when asked what else they were feeling, non-
repressors typically report an array of additional, nondominant feelings: "Well, it mostly made me angry, but also a 
little sad, and a little disgusted too...." Repressors steadfa stly report no secondary emotions. Black-and-white feelings, 
with little tolerance for subtle blends.
Are these people for real? Maybe not. Maybe beneath their tranqu il exteriors, they're actually anxious messes who 
won't admit to their frailties. Careful study indicates that some repressors are indeed mo stly concerned about keeping 
up appearances. (One clue is that they tend to give less "repressed" an swers on personality questionnaires when they 
can be anonymous.) And so their physiological symptoms of stress are easy to explain. We can cross those folks off 
the list.
What about the rest of the repressors? Could they be decei ving themselves—roiling with anxiety, but not even aware 
of it? Even careful questionnaires cannot detect that sort of self-deception; to ferret it out, psychol ogists traditionally 
rely on less structured, more open-ended tests (of the "What do you see in this picture?" variety). Those tests show 
that, yes, some repressors are far more anxious than they realize; their physio logical stress is also readily explained.Page 170 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmYet even after you cross the anxious self -deceivers off the list, there remains a gr oup of people with tight, constrained 
personalities who are truly just fine: mentally healthy, ha ppy, productive, socially interactive. But they have 
overactive stress-responses. The levels of glucocorticoids  in their bloodstream are as  elevated as among highly 
depressed people, and they have elevated  sympathetic tone as well. When expose d to a cognitive challenge, repressors 
show unusually large increases in hear t rate, blood pressure, sweating, and muscle tension. And these overaroused 
stress-responses exact a price. For example, repressive individuals have relatively poor immune function. 
Furthermore, coronary disease patients who have repr essive personalities are mo re vulnerable to cardiac 
complications than are non-repressors.
Overactive, endangering stress-responses— yet the people harboring them are not stressed, depressed, or anxious. 
Back to our envious thought—"I wish 1 had their discipline. How do they do it?" The way they do it, I suspect, is by 
working like maniacs to generate their structured, represse d world with no ambiguity or  surprises. And this comes 
with a physiological bill.
Davidson and Andrew Tomarken of Vanderbilt University have used electroencephalogr aphic (EEG) techniques to 
show unusually enhanced activity in a portion of the frontal co rtex of repressors. As will be covered at length in the 
next chapter, this is a region of the brain involved in inhibiting impulsive emotion and cognition (for example, 
metabolic activity in this area has been reported to be decr eased in violent sociopaths). It's the nearest anatomical 
equivalent we have to a superego; makes you say you love the appalling dinner, compliment the new hairdo, keeps 
you toilet trained. It keeps those emotions tightly under  control, and as Gross's wo rk showed with emotional 
repression, it takes a lot of work  to keep an especia lly tight squeeze on those emotional sphincters.
It can be a frightening world out ther e, and the body may well reflect the effort of threading our way through those 
dark, menacing forests. How much better it would be to be able to sit, relaxed, on the sun-drenched porch of a villa, 
far, far from the wild things baying. Yet, what looks like relaxation could well be exhaustion—exhaustion from the 
labor of having built a wall around that villa, the effort of keeping out that unsettling, challenging, vibrant world. A 
lesson of repressive personality types and their invisible burdens is that, sometimes, it can be enormously stressful to 
construct a world without stressors.
16
JUNKIES, ADRENALINE JU NKIES, AND PLEASURE
Okay, it's great that we're trying to un derstand how stress works and how to live healthier lives and make the world
a better place and all that, but it's tim e we devoted a little space to a really  important issue—why can't we tickle
ourselves?
Before tackling this profound question, we first need to consider why not all people can make you feel ticklish. It 
probably requires that it be a person that you feel positive about. Thus, you're five and there's no one who can evoke 
ticklish feelings in you like your nutty uncle who chases you around the room first. Or you're twelve and it's the 
person in junior high school who's making your stomach feel like it's full of butterflies and making other parts of your 
body feel all mysterious and weird. It's why most of us probably wouldn't get the giggles if we were tickled by, say, 
Slobodan Milosovic.
Most of us feel fairly positive about ourselves. So why can't we tickle ourselves? Philosophers have ruminated on this 
one through the ages, and have come up with some speculati ons. But theories ab out self-tickling ar e a dime a dozen. 
Finally, a scientist has tackled this mystery by doing an experiment.
Sarah-Jayne Blackmore of the University College of London fi rst theorized that you can't tickle yourself because you 
know exactly when and where you're going to be tickled. There's no element of surprise. So she set out to test this by 
inventing a tickling machine. It consists of a lever attach ed to a foam pad where, thanks to various pulleys and 
fulcrums run by a computer, when you mo ve the lever with one hand, the foam pad almost instantaneously strokes the 
palm of the other hand, moving in the same direction as the movement of the lever.
Being a hard-nosed scientist, Blackmore qu antified the whole thing, coming up w ith a Tickle Index. Then reinvent the 
wheel—if someone else operates the lever, it tickles you; if  you do, nope. No element of surprise. You can't tickle 
yourself, even with a tickle machine.
Then Blackmore tested her theory by removing the sense of predictability from the self-tickling process. First, remove 
the sense of predictability about when the tickling occurs—the person moves th e lever and, unexpectedly, there's a Page 171 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmtime lag until the foam pad moves. Anything more than three-tenths of a second delay and it scores as high of a Tickle 
Index as if someone else had done it. Now,  remove the sense of predictability about where the tickling occurs—the 
person moves the lever, say, forward and back, and, une xpectedly, the foam pad moves in a different direction. 
Anything more than a 90-degree deviation from where you ex pected the pad to move, and it feels as ticklish as if 
someone else had done it.*
Now we've gotten somewhere. Being tic kled doesn't feel ticklish until ther e is an element of surprise. Of 
unpredictability. Of lack of control. And suddenly, our beautiful world of tickle science is shattered around us. We 
spent a whole bunch of time some pages back learning about how the cornerstones of psyc hological stress are built 
around a lack of control and predictability. Those were bad things, yet most of us like being tickled by the right 
person.+
Hey, wait a second—more pieces  of our grand edifice begin to crumble—we stand in long  lines to see movies that 
surprise and terrify us, we bungee jump and go on roller coasters that most definitely deprive us of a sense of control 
and predictability. We pay good money
* An experiment this elegant and clever and eccentric makes me proud to be a scientist.
+ A brief digression into tick ling political correctness. I once read some weir d screed about how no one actually likes being ti ckled, that it is all 
about power and control on the part of th e tickler, particularly when children are in volved, and how the laughing isn't really pleasurable but is 
reflexive, and the requesting to be tickled is some sign of th eir acquiescence to their subordin ance and loving of their chains , and soon terms like 
"phallocentric" and "dead white male" and fake  quotes from Chief Seattle were being bandied  about. As a biolog ist, one of the f irst things you do 
when confronting a puzzle like th is is to go for the Phylogenetic Precedent to gain insight into a human phenomenon— do other s pecies do this? 
Because if other, closely related species do the same thing, th at weakens arguments about how th e whole phenomenon is embedded in human 
culture. I can report here that ch imps love to be tickled. All those chimps who get trained in American Sign Language—one of th e first words they 
master is "tickle" and one of the first sentences is "tickle me."  In college, I worked with one of those chimps. He'd do the "t ickle me" sequence 
correctly, and you'd tickle him like mad—chimps curl up and cover their ribs and make this fast, soundless, breathy giggle when  they're being 
tickled. Stop, he sits up, catches his breath, mops his brow beca use of how it's all just too much. Then he gets a gleamy look in his eye and it's, 
"Tickle me," all over again.
to be stressed sometimes. And, as long as we're at it, as  we've seen already, we turn  on the sympathetic nervous 
system and secrete ample amounts of glucoc orticoids during sex, what's up with th at? Chapter 9 oriented  us to the role 
of stress-induced analgesia in ma king us feel less awful during stress. But, as the starting point of this chapter, if you 
get the right amount of stress, if you get allostatically challenged just right, it doesn't just feel less awful; it can feel 
great.
So how does that work? And why do some people find stress and risk-taking to feel so gr eat that they get addicted? 
And how does stress interact with the pleasures and addictive qualities of various substances of abuse?
THE NEUROCHEMISTRY OF PLEASURE
As we saw in chapter 14, th e brain contains a pleasure pathway that makes heavy use of the neurotransmitter 
dopamine. As we also saw in that chapter, if that pathway becomes depleted of dopamine, anhedo-nia or dysphoria can be an outcome. This "dopaminergic" projection begins in  a region deep in the brain called the ventral tegmentum. 
It then projects to something called the nucleus accumbens and then, in  turn, goes on to all so rts of other places. These 
include the frontal cortex whic h, as we saw in chapters 10 and 12, plays a key role in executive function, decision 
making, and impulse control. There are al so projections to the anterior cingulat e cortex which, as we saw in chapter 
14, seems to play a role in having a sense of sadness (leading to the idea that the dopaminergic projection normally 
inhibits the cingulate). There's also a h eavy projection into the amygdala which, as  we saw in the last chapter, plays a 
key role in anxiety and fear.
The relationship between dopamine and pleasure is subtle and critical. On fi rst pass, one might predict that the 
neurotransmitter is about pleasure, a bout reward. For example, take a monke y who has been trained in a task: a 
distinctive bell sounds, which means that the monkey now pre sses a lever ten times; this leads, ten seconds later, to a 
desirable food reward. You might initially guess that activation of the dopamine pathway causes neurons in the frontal 
cortex to become their most active in  response to the reward. Some brilliant studies by Wolfram Schultz of the 
University in Fribourg in Switzerland showed something mo re interesting. Yes, frontal neurons become excited in 
response to reward. But the biggest response comes earlier, around the time of the bell sounding and the task 
commencing. This isn't a signalPage 172 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmPhilip Guston, Bad Habits, oil on canvas, 1970.
of, "This feels great." It's about master y and expectation and confidence. It's "I  know what that lig ht means. I know 
the rules: IF I press the lever, THEN I'm going to get some  food. I'm all over this. This is going to be great." The 
pleasure is in the anticipation of a reward; from the standpoint of dopamine, the reward is almost an afterthought.
Psychologists refer to the period of anticipation, of expecta tion, of working for reward as  the "appetitive" stage, one 
filled with appetite, and call the stage that commences with  reward the "consummately" stage. What Schultz's findings 
show is that if you know your appetite is going to be sa ted, pleasure is more about the appetite than about the sating.*
* A college friend, who had a seemingly endless string of disastr ous relationships, summed up this concept with a cynicism that  would have made 
George Bernard Shaw proud: "A relationshi p is the price you pay for the anticipation of it." (It was Shaw who once wrote, "Love  is the gross 
exaggeration of the differences between  one person and everybody else.")
The next key thing to learn is that the dopamine and its associated sense of pleasurable anticipation fuels the work 
needed to get that reward. Paul Phillips from the University of North Carolina has used some immensely fancy 
techniques to measure millisecond bursts of dopamine in rats a nd has showed with the best time resolution to date that 
the burst comes just before the behavior. Then, in the clin cher, he artificially stimul ated dopamine release and, 
suddenly, the rat would start lever pressing. Th e dopamine does indeed  fuel the behavior.
The next critical point is that  the strength of these pathways  can change, just like in any ot her part of the brain. There's 
the burst of dopaminergic pleasure once that light comes on, and all that is required is to  train for longer and longer 
intervals between light and reward, for those anticipatory burs ts of dopamine to fuel ever -increasing amounts of lever 
pressing. This is how gratification postponement works—the co re of goal-directed behavior is expectation. Soon we're 
forgoing immediate pleasure in order to get good grades in order to get into a good college in order to get a good job 
in order to get into the nursing home of our choice.
Recent work by Schultz adds a twist to this . Suppose in one setup, the subject gets  a signal, does a task, and then gets 
a reward. In the second situatio n, there's the signal, the task, and then, rather than a certain ty of reward, there's simply 
a high probability of it. In other words, within a generally benevolent context (that is, the outcome is still likely to be 
good), there's an element of surprise. Under those conditions, there is even greater release of dopamine. Right after the 
task is completed, dopamine rel ease starts to rise far higher than usual, peaking right around the time that the reward, 
if it's going to happen, should be arriving. Introduce, "This is going to be great... maybe ... probably ..." and your 
neurons spritz dopamine all over the place in anticipation. This is the essence of  why, as we learned in Intro Psych, 
intermittent reinforcement is so reinforcing. What these fi ndings show is that if you think there's a reasonably good 
chance that your appetite is going to be sated, but you're not positive, pleasure becomes even more about the appetite 
than about the sating.Page 173 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSo dopamine plays an important role in the anticipation of pleasure and in energizing you in order to respond to 
incentives. However, it can't be the whole story of pleasur e, reward, and anticipation. For example, rats can still 
respond to reward to some extent even  when artificially deplet ed of dopamine in those pathways. Opioids probably 
play a role in the other pathways involved. Moreover, the dopamine pathway might be most relevant to spiky, intense 
versions
of anticipation. A recent and fascinatin g study shows this. Get some college st udents (either gender) who are in what 
they believe to be their "one true love" relationship. Put them in a scanner and flash up various familiar but neutral 
faces. Somewhere along the way, flash up  a picture of the student's beloved. For people who were in the first few 
months of the relationship, the dopamine pathways lit up . For people whose relationship was more on the order of 
years, that's not what happened. Instead, there was activation of the anterior cin-gul ate, that part of the brain discussed 
in the chapter on depression. The tegm entum/accumbens dopamine system seems to be about edgy, make-you-crazy-
with-anticipation passion. Two years la ter, it's the cingulate weighing in, mediating something akin, perhaps, to 
comfort and warmth ... or maybe even a nonhyperventilating version of love.
STRESS AND REWARD
So the really good thing about being tick led is the anticipation of being tickled. The element of surp rise and lack of 
control. In other words, we're back to where we started—when does a lack of control and predictability fuel dopamine 
release and a sense of anticip atory pleasure, and when is it the core of what makes psychological stress stressful?
The key seems to be whether the uncertainty occurs in a benign or malevolent context. If it's the right person tickling 
you in that adolescent stage of being on the cusp of sexuality, maybe, just maybe, that tickling is going to be followed 
by something really good, like hand-holding. In contrast, if it's Slobodan Milosovic who is tickling you, maybe, just 
maybe, it will be followed up by his trying to ethnically cleanse you. If the context is one of you being at risk for 
getting shocked, the lack of predictability adds to the stress.  If the context is one in which that special someone is 
likely to eventually say yes, he r running hot and cold is all th at's needed to start you off on  a fifty-year courtship. Part 
of what makes the Las Vegas world of gambling so addictive is the brilliant ways in which people are manipulated 
into thinking that the environment is a benign, rather than malevolent, one—the belief that the outcome is likely to be 
a good one, especially for some one as lucky and special as you ... so long as you keep putting in those coins and 
pressing that lever.
What makes for the benign sort of environment in which uncertainty is pleasurable, ra ther than stressful? One key 
element is how long the experience goes on. Pleasurable lack of control is a ll about transience—it's not for nothing 
that roller-coaster rides are three minu tes rather than three week s long. Another thing that biases toward uncertainty 
being pleasurable is if it comes bound wi thin a larger package of control and predictability. No matter how real and 
viscer-ally gripping the scary movie may be, you still know th at Anthony Perkins is stalking Janet Leigh, not you. No 
matter how wild and scary and unpredictable and exhilarating the bungee jumping is, it's still in the context of having 
assured yourself that these folks have a license from the Bungee Ju mping Safety Police. This is the essence of play. 
You surrender some degree of control—think of how a dog initiates play with another dog by crouching down, 
making himself smaller, more vulnerable and less in control. But it has to be within a larger context of safety. You 
don't roll over and expose your throat in play to someone you haven't sniffed over carefully.
Time now to introduce some really unexpected neurochemistry that ties this all together. Glucocorticoids, those 
hormones which have been discovered at  the scene of the crime for virtually all the stress-related pathology we've 
been learning about, those same villainous glucocorticoid s ... will trigger the release of dopamine from pleasure 
pathways. It's not some generic effect upon all the dopamine  pathways in the brain. Just the pleasure pathway. Most 
remarkably, Pier Vincenzo Piazza and Mich el Le Moal of the University of Bo rdeaux in France have shown that lab 
rats will even work in order to get infused with glucocorti coids, will lever-press the exact  amount needed to maximize 
the amount of dopamine released by the hormone.
And what is the pattern of glucocorticoid exposure that maximized dopamine release? You can probably guess 
already. A moderate rise that doesn't go on for too long. As we've seen, experience seve re and prolonged stress, and 
learning, synaptic plasticity, and immune defenses are impa ired. As we saw, experience moderate and transient stress, 
and memory, synaptic plasticity, and immunity are enhanced. Same thing here. Experience severe and prolonged 
glucocorticoid exposure, and we've retu rned to chapter 14—dopamine depletion, dysphoria, and depression. But with 
moderate and transient glucocorticoid elevation you rel ease dopamine. And transient activation of the amygdala 
releases dopamine as well. Couple th e glucocorticoid rise with the accompan ying activation of the sympathetic 
nervous system, and you're also enhancing glucose and oxygen delivery to the brain.
You feel focused, alert, alive, motivate d, anticipatory. You feel great. We have  a name for such transient stress. We 
call it "stimulation."*
ADRENALINE JUNKIESPage 174 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhat does this tell us about the subset of people who thrive on stress and risk-taking, who are most alive under 
circumstances that woul d ulcerate anyone else?+ These are the folks who push ever y envelope. They spend every last 
dollar in Monopoly, have furtive sex in public places, try out a new,  complicated recipe on important dinner guests, 
answer the ad in Soldier of Fortune. What's up with them?
We can make some pretty informed gues ses. Maybe they release atypically low amounts of dopamine. Or, as another 
version of the same problem, maybe they have versions of  dopamine receptors that are atypically unresponsive to a 
dopamine signal. In that scenario, it's hard to "just say no" to some thrilling possibility when there's not a whole lot of 
pleasurable yes's in one's life (a point that we'll return to  when considering substance a buse). Supporting this idea are 
some reports of atypical versions of dopamine r eceptors in people with addictive personalities.++
As another possibility, maybe the baseline of dopamine signali ng is fine, but those transients of stimulation cause 
whopping great rises of dopamine, bigger anticipatory pleasure signals than in most other people. That would 
certainly encourage one to try the stuff again.
There's yet another possibility. Experience something thrillin g with the right intensity and duration, and dopamine is 
released in the pleasure pathwa y. End of experience, dopamine levels go back down to baseline. What if someone's 
brain happens not to be great at keeping up with dopamine reserves in the pleasure pathway? As a result, at
* This explains a pattern, noted in chapter 14, that is often s een when people are administered  synthetic glucocorticoids to co ntrol an autoimmune 
or inflammatory disease. Eventu ally, people typically feel depressed. But th e first few days, it's the opposite— energized and euphoric.
+ What should be obvious is that  instead of the term "adrenaline junkies" or even  "epinephrine junkies," more proper would be " transiently and 
moderately increased levels of glucocorticoids junkies."
++ Many in the field of addictio n research believe that there are personalities th at are addictive across the board in a wide r ange of areas—with 
drugs of abuse, with alcohol, with gambling, with being financ ially or sexually imprudent. Th is is controversial, however.
the end of a stimulating increase in dopamine release, dopamine levels not only drop back to baseline, but to a 
smidgen below baseline. In other words, a little lower than where you started. What's the only solution then to 
counteract this mild dysphoria, this mild inability to antic ipate pleasure? Find something el se that's thrilling and, of 
necessity, a bit riskier, in order to achieve the same dopamin e peak of the prior time. Afte rward, your baseline drops a 
bit lower. Necessitating another, and an other stimulant, each one having to be  bigger, in the s earch for the giddy 
heights of dopamine that you reached that first time.
This is the essence of the downward ratcheting of addiction.  Once, a long time ago, the sixteen-year-old Evel Knievel, 
behind the steering wheel with his brand-new driver's permit, sped up to beat a red light, and got a bit of a buzz from 
this. He then discovered, the next time doing it, that it didn't feel quite as exciting.
ADDICTION
There's an astonishing number of substa nces that different cultur es have come up with that can cause you to be 
ruinously addicted, to compulsively take the substance desp ite negative consequences. The field of addiction research 
has long had to grapple with the sheer variety of these compounds, from the standpoint of understanding their effects 
on brain chemistry. Alcohol is  very different from tobacco or cocaine. Let alone trying  to make sense of how things 
like gambling or shopping wind up being addictive.
Amid this variety, though, there's a cr itical commonality, which is that th ese compounds all cause the release of 
dopamine in the ventral tegmentum-nucl eus accumbens pathway. Not all to the same extent. Cocaine, which directly 
causes the release of dopamine from those neurons, is extremely good at doing it. Other drugs which do so through 
intervening steps are much less potent—a lcohol, for example. But they all do to  at least some extent, and in brain-
imaging studies of humans taking addictive drugs, the more subjectively pleasurable a person finds a particular 
exposure to a drug to have been, the more activation of that pathway. This certainly makes sense and defines an 
addictive substance—you anticipate how pleasurabl e it will be and thus come back for more.
But addictive substances are not only addictive, but also typically have th e property of causing tolerance, or 
habituation. In other words,Page 175 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmToland Grinnell, Rodent Addiction System (White), detail, mixed media, 2003.
you need increasing amounts of the stuff to get the same anticipatory oomph as before. The explanation lies, in part, 
with the magnitude of dopamine released by these compounds. Consider some of the sources of pleasure we have—
promotion at work, beautiful sunset, great sex, getting a park ing spot where there's still time on the meter. They all 
release dopamine for most people. Same thing for a rat. Food for a hungry rat, sex for a horny one, and dopamine 
levels rise 50 to 100 percent in this pathway. But gi ve the rat some cocaine a nd there is a THOUSAND-FOLD 
increase in dopamine release.
What's the neurochemical consequence of this tidal wave of dopamine? We consid ered a related version in chapter 14. 
If someone always yells at you, you stop listening. If you flood a synapse with a gazillion times more of a 
neurotransmitter than is usually the case,  the recipient neuron has to compensate by becoming less sensitive. No one is 
sure what the mechanism is fo r what's termed an "opponent
process" that counteracts the dopamine blast. Maybe fewer dopamine receptors, ma ybe fewer of whatever the 
dopamine receptors connect to. But rega rdless of the mechanism, the next time, it is going to take even more 
dopamine release to have the same im pact on that neuron. This is the addictive cycle of escalating drug use.
Around this point, there is a transition in the process of addiction. Early on, addiction is about "wanting" the drug, 
anticipating its effects, and about how high those dopamine levels are when they're pouring out in a drug-induced 
state (in addition, the release of endogenous opiates around th is time fuels that sense of "wanting"). It's about the 
motivation to get the reward of a drug. With time there's the transition to "needing" the drug, which is about how low 
the dopamine lows are without the drug. The stranglehold of addiction is when it is no longer the issue of how good 
the drug feels, but how bad its absence f eels. It's about the motivation to avoid the punishment of not having the drug. 
George Koob of the Scripps Research Institute has shown that  when rats are deprived of a drug they are addicted to, 
there is a tenfold increase in levels of CRH in the brain, particularly in pathwa ys mediating fear and anxiety, such as 
in the amygdala. No wonder you feel so awful. Brain-imaging studies of drug us ers at that stage sh ow that viewing a 
film of actors pretending to use drugs activates dopamine pathways in the brain more than does watching porn films.
This process emerges in the co ntext of the uncertainty and intermittent rein forcement that we discussed earlier. You're 
pretty sure you've scraped together enough money, you're pretty sure you can find a dealer, you're pretty sure you 
won't get caught, you're pretty sure it will be good stuff— but still, there's that element of uncertainty amid the 
anticipation, and that stokes the addictiveness like crazy.
So this tells us something about the acquisition of addiction, the downward spiral of tolerance to the drug, and the 
psychological contexts in which those pr ocesses can occur. There's a last basic feature of addiction that needs to be 
discussed. Consider the rare individual who has beaten his addiction, left his demons behind, rebooted and started a Page 176 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmnew life. It's been months, years, even  decades since he's gone near the dr ug. But uncontrollable circumstances put 
him back where he always used the drug  back when—back on that same street co rner, in that same music studio, back 
in the same overstuffed armchair near  the bar in the country club—and the cr aving comes roaring back like it was 
yesterday. The capacity to induce that cr aving doesn't necessarily decline with time; as many drug abusers in that 
situation will say, it is as if they had never stopped using.
This is the phenomenon of context-depe ndent relapse—the itch is stronger in so me places than others, specifically in 
places that you associate with prior drug use. You can sh ow the identical phenomenon in a lab rat. Get them addicted 
to some substance, where they  are willing to lever-press like mad to get in fused with the stuff. Stick them in a novel 
cage with a lever and you may get some lever pressing out of  them. But put them back in the cage that they associate 
with the drug exposure, and they lever-press like mad. And, as with humans, the potential for relapse doesn't 
necessarily decrease over time.
This process of associating drug use with a particular se tting is a type of learning, an d a lot of current addiction 
research explores the neurobiology of such learning. This work focuses not so much on those dopamine neurons, but 
on the neurons that project to them. Many of them come from cortical and hippocampal regions that carry information 
about setting. If you repeatedly use a drug in the same setting, those projections onto those dopamine neurons are 
repeatedly activated and eventu ally become potentiated, strengthened, in the same ways as the hippocampal synapses 
we learned about in chapter 10. When those projections get strong enough, if you return to that setting, the dopamine 
anticipation of the drug gets triggered me rely by the context. In a lab rat in this  situation, you don't even need to place 
the animal back into the same setting.  Just electrically stimulate those path ways that project onto the dopamine 
neurons, and you reinstate the dr ug craving. As goes one of the cliches of addiction, there's really no such thing as an 
ex-addict—it is simply an addict who is not in the context that triggers use.
STRESS AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
We are finally in a position to consider the interactions between stress and drug abuse. We begin by considering what 
taking any of various psychostimulant drugs does to the stress-response. And everyone knows the answer to that 
one—"I'm not feeling any pain." Drugs of abuse make you feel less stressed.
In general, the evidence is pretty d ecent for this, given a few provisos. Peopl e do generally report themselves as 
feeling less stressed, less anxious, if a st ressor occurs after some psychoactive drug 's effects have kicked in. Alcohol is 
best known for this, and is formally termed an anxiolytic, a drug that "lyses," or di sintegrates anxiety. You can
show this with a lab rat. As discussed in the last chapter, rats hug the dark corners when put into a brightly lit cage. 
Put a hungry rat in a cage with some food in the brightly lit center, and how long does it take to overcome its anxious 
conflict and go for the food? Alcoho l decreases the time to do this, as  do many other addictive compounds.
How does this work? Many drugs, including alcohol, raise glucoc orticoid levels when they are first taken. But with 
more sustained use, various drugs can blunt the nuts and bolt s of the stress-response. Alc ohol, for example, has been 
reported in some cases to decrease th e extent of sympathetic nervous system  arousal and to dampen CRH-mediated 
anxiety. In addition, drugs may change the cognitive apprai sal of the stressor. What does that jargon mean? Basically, 
if you're in such a mess of an altered state that you can barely remember what species you are, you may not pick up on 
the subtle fact that someth ing stressful has occurred.
Intrinsic in that explanation is the do wnside of the anxiety-reducing consequences of getting wasted. As the blood 
levels of the drug drop, as the effect s wear off, the cognition a nd reality sneak back in an d, if anything, the drugs 
become just the opposite, become anxiety-generating. The dyna mics of many of these drugs in the body is such that 
the amount of time that blood levels are rising, with their stress-reducing effects, is sh orter than the amount of time 
that they are dropping. So what's the solution? Drink, ingest, inhale, shoot up, snort all over again.
So various psychostimulants  can decrease stress-responses, secondary to blunting the machinery of the stress-
response, plus making you such a disoriented mess that you don't even notice that there's been a stressor. How about 
the flip side of this relationship: What does stress have to do with the likelihood of taking (and abusing) drugs? The 
clear punch line is that stress pushes you toward more dr ug use and a greater chance of relapse, although it's not 
completely clear how stress does this.
The first issue is the effect of stress on initially becoming addicted. Set up a rat in a situation where if it presses a lever  
X number of times, it gets infused with some potentially addictive drug—alcohol, amphetamines, cocaine. 
Remarkably, only some rats get into this "self-administration" paradigm enough to get addicted (and we'll see shortly 
which rats are more likely). If you stress a rat just before the start of this session of drug exposure, it is now more 
likely to self-administer to the point of addiction. And just  as you'd expect from chapter 13, unpredictable stress drives 
a rat toward addiction morePage 177 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmeffectively than does predicta ble stress. Similarly, put a rat or a monkey in a position of being socially subordinate, 
and the same increased risk occurs. And,  no surprise, stress clearly increases al cohol consumption in humans as well.
Importantly, stress increases the addictiv e potential of a drug only if the stressor comes right before the drug exposure. 
In other words, short-term stress. The type that boosts dop amine levels transiently. Why do es stress have this effect? 
Imagine that you go into a bout of exposure to a novel, potentially addictive drug, and you just happen to be the type 
of rat or human for whom the drug doesn't do a whole lot—you're not releasing much dopamine or the other 
neurotransmitters involved, you're not getting this anticipator y sense afterward of wanting to do it again. But couple 
that same ho-hum dopamine rise with a rise due to stress and, whoa, you erroneously decide that something cosmic 
has just happened—where can you get some more? Thus, acu te stress increases the reinforcing potential of a drug.
All that makes sense. But, naturally, things get more comp licated. Stress increases the li kelihood of self-administering 
a drug to an addictive extent, but this time we're talking about stress during childhood. Or even as a fetus. Stress a 
pregnant rat and her offspring will have an increased propens ity for drug self-administration as adults. Give a rat an 
experimentally induced birth complication by briefly depriving it of oxygen at birth, and you produce the same. Ditto 
if stressing a rat in its infancy. The same works in n onhuman primates—separate a mo nkey from its mother during 
development, and that animal is more likely to self-adminis ter drugs as an adult. The same has been shown in humans.
In these instances, the stressor  during development can't be working merely by causing a transient rise in dopamine 
release. Something long term has to be occurring. We're back in chapter 6 and perinatal experiences causing lifelong 
"programming" of the brain and body. It's not clear how this works in terms of addictive substances, other than that 
there obviously has to be a permanent change in the sensitivity of the reward pathways.
What about once the addiction has occurre d—what does ongoing stress do to the extent of abuse? No surprise, it 
increases it. How does this work? Mayb e because of transient stressors briefl y boosting dopamine levels and giving 
the drug more oomph. But by now, the main point for the addict may not be about wanting the high as much as 
needing to avoid the low of drug withdrawal. As noted, during this time, levels of anxiety-mediating CRH are way up 
in the amygdala. Moreover, glucocorticoid secretion is consistently elevated during
withdrawal, into the range wher e it depletes dopamine. And what happens if  you add additional stress on top of that? 
All that the extra glucocorticoids can do in this scenario is make the dopamine  depletion even worse. Thus increasing 
the craving for that drug-induced boost of dopamine.
What about that rare individual who manages to stop abusin g whatever drug she's addict ed to and successfully goes 
on the wagon? Stress increases the odds of her relapsing into drug use. As usual, the same is true in rats. Get a rat who 
is self-administering a drug by lever pressing to the point of addiction. Now, switch the rat to being infused with 
saline instead of with the drug. Soon the lever pressing "extinguishes"—the rat gives up on it, won't bother with the 
lever anymore. Some time later, return the rat to that cag e with the drug-associated le ver and there's an increased 
likelihood that the rat will try lever pressing for the drug ag ain. Infuse the rat with a bit of the drug just before 
returning it to that familiar locale and it's even more likely to start self-adm inistering again—you' ve reawakened the 
taste for that drug. If you stress the rat right before you retu rn it to the cage, it's even more likely to restart the drug 
use. As usual, unpredictable and uncontrollable stressors are th e ones that really revive th e drug use. And, as usual, 
the human studies show basically the same thing.
How does stress do this? It's not entirely clear. The effects of glucocorticoids on dopamine release may be relevant, 
but I have not seen a clear mo del built around their interaction. Maybe it's  the stress-induced increase in sympathetic 
arousal, mediated by CRH in the am ygdala. There's also some evidence su ggesting that stress will increase the 
strength of those associative projections into the pleasure pathway. Perhaps it has something to do with stress 
impairing the functioning of the frontal cortex, which normally  has that sensible, restraining role of gratification 
postponement and decision making— shut down your frontal cortex and suddenly you have what seems like an irresistibly clever idea: "I  know, why don't I start taking that drug again which nearly destroyed my life."
So stress can increase the odds of abusin g a drug to the point of addiction in the first place, make withdrawal harder, 
and make relapse more likely. Why do all the above happen  more readily to some peop le than others? Immensely 
interesting work by Pi azza and Le Moal has started to answer this.
Remember those apples and pears in chapter 5? Who are the individuals who are more prone toward putting on fat 
around their gut, becoming apples, the less  healthy version of fat deposition? We saw that they are likely to be people 
with more of a tendency to secrete
glucocorticoids in response to stressors, and to have a slow er recovery from such a stre ss-response. Same thing here. 
Which rats are most likely to self-administer when given a chance and, once self-administering, to do so to the point 
of escalating addiction? The ones who are "high reactors," who are most behavi orally disrupted by being placed in a 
novel environment, who are more  reactive to stress. They secr ete glucocorticoids l onger than the other rats in response 
to a stressor, causing them to pour out more dopamine when they ar e first exposed to the drug. So if you're the kind of Page 178 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmrat who is particularly thrown out of kilter by stress, you're atypically likely to try something that temporarily 
promises to make things right.
THE REALM OF SYNTHETIC PLEASURE
Chapter 13 raised the important point th at positive and negative affect are not mere opposites of each other, and that 
they can independently influence one's risk of depression. Addiction maps onto this point well, in that an addiction 
can broadly serve two dissociable functions. One involves positive affect—drugs can generate pleasure (albeit with an 
ultimate cost that offsets the transient rewards). The other function concerns negative affect—drugs can be used to try 
to self-medicate away pain, depression, f ear, anxiety, and stress. This dual purp ose transitions us to the next chapter 
with its theme that society do es not evenly distribute healthy opportunities fo r pleasure, or sources of fear and anxiety. 
It is hard to "just say no" when life demands a constant vigilance and when there are few other things to which to say 
"yes."
The premise of this book is that we humans, especially we westernized humans, have come up with some pretty 
strange sources of negative emotions—worrying about and being saddened by purely psychological events that are 
displaced over space and time. But we we sternized humans have also come up with  some strange sources of positive 
emotions.
Once, during a concert of cathedral orga n music, as I sat there amid that tsun ami of sound getting gooseflesh, I was 
struck with a thought—way back when, for a medieval peasant, this must have been the loudest human-made sound 
they would ever experience, something th at would be awe-inspiring in ways we  can no longer im agine. No wonder 
they signed up for the religion being proffered. And now
Leroy Almon, Mr. and Mrs. Satan Fishing, 1994.
we are constantly pummeled with sou nds that dwarf quaint cathedral organs . Once, hunter-gathe rers might chance 
upon a gold mine— honey from a wild bee hive—and thus would briefly satisfy one of our most hard-wired food 
cravings. Now we have hundreds of car efully engineered, designed, and mark eted commercial foods filled with 
rapidly absorbed processed sugars that cause a burst of sensation that can't be matched by some lowly natural food. 
Once, we had lives that, amid considerable  privation and negatives, also offered a huge array of subtle and often hard-
won pleasures. And now we have drugs that cause spasms of pleasure and dopamine a thousand-fold higher than 
anything stimulated in our drug-free world.
Peter Sterling, of allostasis fame, has written brilliantly about how our sources of pleasure have become so narrowed 
and artificially strong. His thinking cent ers around the fact that ou r anticipatory pleasure pa thway is stimulated by 
many different things. For this to work, the pathway must rapidly habituate, must desensitize to any given source that 
has stimulated it, so that it is prepared to respond to the next stimulant. But unnaturally strong explosions of synthetic 
experience and sensation and pleasure evok e unnaturally strong degrees of hab ituation. This has two consequences. 
As the first, soon we hardly notice an ymore the fleeting whispers of pleasure cau sed by leaves in autumn, or by the 
lingering glance of the right person, or by the promise of reward that will come after a long, difficult, and worthy
task. The other consequence is that, afte r awhile, we even habituate to those ar tificial deluges of intensity and moment
-ness. If we were nothing but machines of local homeosta tic regulation, as we consume more, we would desire less. 
But instead, our tragedy is that we just become hungrier. More and faster and stronger. "Now" isn't as good as it used 
to be, and won't suffice tomorrow.Page 179 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm17
THE VIEW FROM THE BOTTOM
Toward the end of the first chapter, I voiced a caveat— when I discuss a way in which stress can make you sick,
that is merely shorthand for discussing how stress can make  you more likely to get diseases that make you sick.
That was basically a first pa ss at a reconciliation between
two very different camps that think about poor health. At on e extreme, you have the mainst ream medical crowd that is 
concerned with reductive biology. For them, poor health revolves around issues of bacteria, viruses, genetic 
mutations, and so on. At the other extr eme are the folks anchored in mind-body issues, for whom poor health is about 
psychological stress, lack of c ontrol and efficacy, and so on. A lot of this book has, as one of its goals, tried to develop 
further links between those two viewpoints. This has come in the form of showing how sensitive reductive biology 
can be to some of those psychological factors, and exploring the mechanisms that account for this. And it has come in 
the form of criticizing the extremes of both camps: on the on e hand, trying to make clear how limiting it is to believe 
that humans can ever be reduced to a DNA sequence, and on the other, trying  to indicate the damaging idiocy of 
denying the realities of human physiology and disease. The ideal resolution harks back to the wisdom of Herbert 
Weiner, as discussed in chapter 8, that disease, even th e most reductive of diseases, cannot be appreciated without 
considering the person who is ill.
Terrific; we're finally getting somewhere. But this analysis, and most pages of this book up until now, have left out a 
third leg in this stool—the idea that poor health also has something to do with poor jobs in a shrinking economy, or a 
diet funded by food  stamps with too
many meals consisting of Coke and Cheetos, or living in a crummy overcrowded apartm ent close to a toxic waste 
dump or without enough heat in winter. Let alone living on the streets or in a refugee camp or a war zone. If we can't 
consider disease outside the context of the person who is ill, we also can't consid er it outside the context of the society 
in which that person has gotten ill, an d that person's place in that society.
I recently found support fo r this view in an unexpected corner. Neuroanatomy is the st udy of the conn ections between 
different areas of the nervou s system, and it can sometime s seem like a mind-numbing  form of stamp collecting—
some multisyllabically named part of the brain sends its axons in a projection with another multisyllabic name to 
eighteen multisyllabic target sites, whereas  in the next county over in the brain.... During a period of my errant youth I 
took particular pleasure in knowing as much neuroanatomy  as possible, the more obscu re, the better. One of my 
favorite names was that given to a tiny space that exists  between two layers of the meninges, the tough fibrous 
wrapping found around the brain. It wa s called the "Virchow-Robin space," and my ability to toss off that name won 
me the esteem of my fellow neuroanatomy dorks. I never figured out who Robin was, but Virchow was Rudolph 
Virchow, a nineteenth-cen tury German pathologist and anatomist. Man, to be honored by having your name attached 
to some microscopic space between two layers of Saran brai n wrap—this guy must have b een the king of reductive 
nuts-and-bolts science to merit that. I'd bet he even wo re a monocle, which he'd remove before peering down a 
microscope.
And then I found out a bit about Rudolph Virchow. As a young physician, he came of age with two shattering 
events—a massive typhus outbreak in 1847 that he a ttempted to combat firstha nd and the doomed European 
revolutions of 1848. Th e first was the perfect case for teaching that di sease can be as much about appalling living 
conditions as it is about microorganisms. The second ta ught just how effectively the machinery of power can 
subjugate those in appalling living conditions. In its afterm ath, he emerged not just as someone who was a scientist 
plus a physician plus a public health pioneer plus a progressive politician—that would be plenty unique. But in 
addition, through a creative synthesis, he saw all those roles as manifestations of a single whole. "Medicine is a social 
science, and politics nothing but medicine on a large scale," he wrote. And, "Physicians are the natural attorneys of 
the poor." This is an extraordinarily large vision for a man getting microscopic spaces na med for him. And unless one 
happens to be a very atypical physic ian these days, this vision must also
seem extraordinarily quaint, as sadly quaint as Picasso thinking he could throw some paint on a canvas, call it 
Guernica, and do something to halt Fascism.
The history of status thymicolymphaticus, the imaginary dis ease of a supposedly enlarged  thymus gland in infants, 
detailed at the end of chapter 8, taught us that your place in  society can leave its imprint on the corpse you eventually 
become. The purpose of this chapter is to  show how your place in so ciety, and the sort of so ciety it is, can leave an 
imprint on patterns of disease while you are alive, and to show that part of und erstanding this impr int incorporates the Page 180 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmnotion of stress. This will be preparatory for an important notion to be discussed in the final chapter on stress 
management—that certain techniques for reducing stress work differently depending on where you dwell in your 
society's hierarchy.
A strategy that I've employed in a numb er of chapters is to introduce some phenomenon in the c ontext of animals, 
often social primates. This has been in order to show so me principle in a simplified form before turning to the 
complexity of humans. I do the same in this chapter, beginning with a discussion of what social rank has to do with 
health and stress-related diseases among animals. But this time, there is a paradoxical twist that, by the end of this 
chapter, should seem depressing as hell—this time, it is we humans who provide a brutally simple version and our 
nonhuman primate cousins the nuance and subtlety.
PECKING ORDERS AMONG BEASTS WITH TAILS
While pecking orders—dominance hierarchies—might have first been discerne d among hens, they exist in all sorts of 
species. Resources, no matter how plentiful,  are rarely divvied up ev enly. Instead of every contested item being fought 
for with bloodied tooth and claw, dominance hierarchies emerge . As formalized systems of inequities, these are great 
substitutes for continual aggression between  animals smart enough to know their place.
Hierarchical competition has been taken to heights of animal complexity by primates. Consider baboons, the kind 
running around savannas in big social groups of a hundred or so beasts. In some cases, the hierarchy can be fluid, with 
ranks changing all the time; in other cases, rank is heredi tary and lifelong. In some cas es, rank can depend on the 
situation—A outranks B when it comes to a contested food item, but the order is reversed if it is competition for 
someone of the
opposite sex. There can be circularit ies in hierarchies—A defeats B defeat s C defeats A. Ranking can involve 
coalitional support—B gets tro unced by A, unless receiving some well-timed  help from C, in which case A is sent 
packing. The actual confrontat ion between two animals can include anything  ranging from a near fatal brawl to a 
highly dominant individual doing nothing more than shifting menacingly and giving subordinates the willies.
Regardless of the particulars, if you're going to be a savanna baboon, you probably don't want to be a low-ranking 
one. You sit there for two minutes digging some root out of the ground to eat, clean it off and ... anyone higher 
ranking can rip it off from you. You spend hours sweet-talking someone into grooming you, getting rid of those 
bothersome thorns and nettles and parasites in your hair, and the grooming session can be broken up by someone 
dominant just for the sheer pleasure of hassling you. Or you could be sitting there, minding your own business, bird-
watching, and some high-ranking guy having a bad day decides to make you pay for it by slashing you with his 
canines. (Such third-party "displacement aggression" accounts for a huge percen tage of baboon vi olence. A middle-
ranking male gets trounced in a fight,  turns and chases a subadult male, who l unges at an adult female, who bites a 
juvenile, who slaps an infant.) For a subordinate animal, life is filled with a dispro portionate share not only of 
physical stressors but of psychological stressors as well—lack of control, of predictability, of outlets for frustration.
It's not surprising, then, that among subordinate male baboons, resting levels of glucocorticoids are significantly 
higher than among dominant individuals—for a subordinate,  everyday basal circumstances are stressful. And that's 
just the start of subordinates' problems with glucocortico ids. When a real st ressor comes along, their glucocorticoid 
response is smaller and slower than in dominant individual s. And when it's all passed, th eir recovery appears to be 
delayed. All these are features that co unt as an inefficient stress-response.*
More problems for subordinate individuals: elevated resting blood pressure; sluggish cardiovascular response to real 
stressors; a sluggish
* I spent about a dozen summers with my baboons figuring out the neuroendocrine mechanisms that give rise to the inefficient gl ucocorticoid 
system in the subordinate animals. "Neuro endocrine mechanisms" means the steps linking the brain, the pituitary, and the adrena ls in the regulation 
of glucocorticoid release. The question becomes which of the step s—brain, pituitary, adrenals—is the spot where there is a prob lem. There turn out 
to be a number of sites where things work  differently in subordinate and dominant ba boons. Interestingly, the mechanisms that g ive rise to the 
pattern in subordinate baboons are virtually identical with those that give rise to th e elevated glucocorticoid levels that occ ur in many humans with 
major depression.Page 181 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmGrooming, a wonderful means of social cohesion and stre ss reduction, in a society where everyone's back is not 
scratched equally.
recovery; suppressed levels of the good HDL cholesterol; am ong male subordinates, testosterone levels that are more 
easily suppressed by stress than in dominant males; fewer ci rculating white blood cells; and lower circulating levels of 
something called insulin-like growth factor-I, which helps heal wounds. As should be clear umpteen pages into this 
book, all these ar e indices of bodies that are chronically stressed.
A chronically activated stress-response (elevated glucocorticoid levels, or resting blood pressure that is too high, or an 
enhanced risk of atherosclerosis) appear s to be a marker of being low ranking in lots of other animal species as well. 
This occurs in primates ranging from standard-issue monkeys like rhesus to b easts called prosimians (such as mouse 
lemurs). Same for rats, mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, wolves, rabbits, pigs. Even fish. Ev en sugar gliders, whatever 
they might be.
A critical question: I'm writing as if being low ranking and subject to all those physical and psychological stressors 
chronically activates the stress-respons e. Could it be the other way around? Could having a second-rate stress-
response set you up for being low ranking?
You can answer this question with stud ies of captive animals, wher e you can artificially form  a social group. Monitor 
glucocorticoid levels, blood pressure, and so on when the group is first formed, and again once rankings have 
emerged, and the comparison will tell you in which di rection the causality works—do physiological differencesPage 182 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmA middle-ranking baboon, who has spent all morning stalking an impala, has the kill stolen from him by a high-
ranking male.
predict who is going to wind up with which rank, or is it the other way around? The answer, overwhelmingly, is that 
rank emerges first, and drives the distinctive stress profile.
So we've developed a pretty clear pictur e. Social subordination equals being ch ronically stressed equals an overactive 
stress-response equals more stress-r elated disease. Now it's time to see why that's simplistic and wrong.
The first hint is hardly a subtle one. When you stand up at some scientific meeting and tell about the health-related 
miseries of your subordinate baboons or tree shrews or sugar gliders, invariably some other endocrinologist who 
studies the subject in some other species gets up and says, "Well, my subordinate animals don't have high blood 
pressure or elevated glucocorticoid levels ." There are lots of species in which social subordination is not associated 
with an overactive stress-response.Page 183 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmWhy should that be? Why should being subordinate not be so bad in that species? The answer  is that in that species, 
it's not so bad being subordinate, or possibly it's actually a drag being dominant.
An example of the first is seen with  a South American monkey called the ma rmoset. Being subordinate among them 
does not involve the misery of physical and psychological stressors; it isn't a case of subjugation being forcibly 
imposed on you by big, mean, dominant animals. Instead, it is a relaxed waiting strategy—marmosets live in small 
social groups of related "cooperative breeders," where being subordinate typi cally means you are helping out your 
more dominant older sibling or cousin and waiting your turn to graduate into that role. Commensurate with this 
picture, David Abbott at the Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center has shown that subordinate marmosets 
don't have overactive stress-responses.
Wild dogs and dwarf mongooses provide examples of the s econd situation in which subordination isn't so bad. Being 
dominant in those species doesn't mean a life of luxury, effortle ssly getting the best of the pickings and occasionally 
endowing an art museum. None of that status quo stuff. Instead, being dominant requires the constant reasser-tion of 
high rank through overt aggression—one is tested again and again. As Scott and Nancy Creel at Montana State 
University have shown, it's not the subordinate anim als among those species who have the elevated basal 
glucocorticoid levels, it's the dominant ones.
Recently, Abbott and I drew on the collaborative efforts of a large numbe r of colleagues who have studied rank/stress 
physiology issues in nonhuman primates. We formalized what  features of a primate soci ety predict whether it is the 
dominant or the subo rdinate animals who
have the elevated stress-responses. To the experts on each  primate species, we posed the same questions: in the 
species that you study, what are the rewards of being dominant? How much of a role  does aggression play in 
maintaining dominance? How much grief does a subordinate individual have to  take? What sources of coping and 
support (including the presence of relatives) do subordinates  of that species have ava ilable to them? What covert 
alternatives to competition are available? If subordinates ch eat at the rules, how likely are they to get caught and how 
bad is the punishment? How often does the hierarchy change? Amid seventeen questions asked concerning the dozen 
different species for which ther e are decent amounts of data av ailable, the best predictors of elevated glucocorticoid 
levels among subordinate animals turn out to be if they are frequently harassed by dominant individuals and if they 
lack the opportunities for social support.
So rank means different things in different species. It tu rns out that rank can also mean  different things  in different 
social groups within the same species. Primatologists these days talk about primate "culture," and this is not an 
anthropomorphic term. For example, chimps  in one part of the rain forest can have a very different culture from the 
folks four valleys over—different frequencies of social behaviors, use of similar vocalizations but with different 
meanings (in other words, something ap proaching the concept of a "dialect"), different ty pes of tool use. And 
intergroup differences influence the rank-stress relationship.
One example is found among female rhes us monkeys, where subordinates normally take a lot of grief and have 
elevated basal glucocorticoid levels—ex cept in one social group that was studied, which, for some reason, had high 
rates of reconciliatory behaviors among animals after fights. The same is found in a baboon troop that just happened 
to be a relatively benign place to be a low-ranking individual. Another exampl e concerns male baboons where, as 
noted, subordinates normally have the elevated glucocorticoid levels—except during a severe drought, when the 
dominant males were so busy looking for food that they didn't have the time or energy to hassle everyone else 
(implying, ironically, that for a subordin ate animal, an environmenta l stressor can be a blessing,  insofar as it saves you 
from a more severe social stressor).
A critical intergroup difference in the stress-response concer ns the stability of the dominance hierarchy. Consider an 
animal who is, say, Number 10 in the hierarchy. In a stable system, that individual is getting trounced 95 percent of 
the time by Number 9 but, in turn, thrashes Number 11 95 percent of the time. In contra st, if Number 10 were winning 
only 51 percent of interactions with Number 11, that suggests
that the two may be close to switching positions. In a stable  hierarchy, 95 percent of the interactions up and down the 
ranks reinforce the status quo. Under those conditions, domi nant individuals are stably entrenched and have all the 
psychological perks of their position— control, predicta bility, and so on. And under those conditions, among the 
various primate species discussed above, it is the dominant individuals who have the healthiest stress-responses.
In contrast, there are rare periods when the hierarchy become s unstable—some key individual has died, someone 
influential has transferred into the group, some pivotal coalitional partnership has fo rmed or come apart—and a 
revolution results, with animals changing ranks left and right. Under those conditions, it is typically the dominant 
individuals who are in the very center of the hurricane of instability , subject to the most fight ing, the most challenges, 
and who are most affected by the see-sawing of coalitiona l politics.* During such unstable periods among those same 
primate species, the dominant individuals no lo nger have the healthie st stress-responses.Page 184 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmSo while rank is an important predictor of individual differ ences in the stress-response, the meaning of that rank, the 
psychological baggage that accompanies it in  a particular society, is at least as important. Another cr itical variable is 
an animal's personal experience of both  its rank and society. For example, consider a period when an immensely 
aggressive male has joined a troop of baboons and is raising hell, attacking animals unprovoked left and right. One 
might predict stress-responses throughout the troop thanks to this destabilizing brute. But,  instead, the pattern reflects 
the individual experience of animals—fo r those lucky enough never to be att acked by this character, there were no 
changes in immune function. In contrast, among those attacked, the mo re frequently that partic ular baboon suffered at 
this guy's teeth, the more immunosuppressed she was. Th us, you ask the question, "W hat are the effects of an 
aggressive, stressful individual on immune function in a social group?" The answer is , "It depends—it's not the 
abstract state of living in a stressful so ciety which is immunosuppressive. Instead, it is the concrete state of how often 
your own nose is being rubbed in that instability."+
* After all, do you think it would have been re stful to have been the czar of Russia in 1917?
+ All you have to do to appreciate that bad times for a group as  a whole do not necessarily tran slate into bad times for every individual is to 
consider all the people who have made fortunes black-marketing penicillin or ho arding critical food su pplies during wartime.
As a final variable, it is not just rank that is an important predictor of the stress-response, not just the society in which 
the rank occurs, or how a member of the society experiences both; it's also pers onality— the topic of chapter 15. As 
we saw, some primates see glasses as half empty and life as full of provocations, and they can't take advantage of 
outlets or social support—those are the individuals with  overactive stress-responses. For them, their rank, their 
society, their personal experiences might all be wonderfu lly salutary, but if their personality keeps them from 
perceiving those advantages, their horm one levels and arteries and immune  systems are going to pay a price.
All things considered, this presents a pretty subtle picture of what social rank has to do with stress-related disease 
among primates. It's reasonable to exp ect the picture to be that much more complicated and subtle  when considering 
humans. Time for a surprise.
DO HUMANS HAVE RANKS?
I personally was always picked last fo r the whiffleball team as a kid, bein g short, uncoordinated, and typically 
preoccupied with some book I was lugging around. Thus, having been perpetually ensconced at the bottom of that 
pecking order, I am skep tical about the notion of ranking systems for humans.
Part of the problem is definitional, in that some supposed  studies of human "dominance" are actually examining Type-
A features—people defined as "dominant" are ones who, in interviews, have ho stile, competitive contents to their 
answers, or who speak quickly and interrupt the interviewer. This is not dominance in a way that any zoologist would 
endorse.
Other studies have examined the physio logical correlates of i ndividual differences in humans who are competing 
directly against one another in a way that looks like dom inance. Some have examined, for example, the hormonal 
responses in college wrestlers dependi ng on whether they won or lost thei r match. Others have examined the 
endocrine correlates of rank competition in the military. One of the most fruitful areas has been to examine ranks in 
the corporate world. Chapter 13 showed  how the "executive stress syndrome" is mostly a myth—people at the top 
give ulcers, rather than get them. Most studies have shown that it is middle management that succumbs to the stress-
related diseases. This is thought to reflect the killer combination
that these folks are often burdened with, namely, high work demands but little autonomy—responsibility without 
control.
Collectively, these studies have produced some experimentally reliable correlations. I'm just  a bit dubious as to what 
they mean. For starters, I'm not sure what a couple of minutes of competitive wrestling between two highly 
conditioned twenty-year-olds t eaches us about which sixty-year-old gets cl ogged arteries. At the other end, I wonder 
what the larger meaning is of rankings among business execu tives— while primate hierarch ies can ultimately indicate 
how hard you have to work for your calories, corporate hierarchies are ultimately about how hard you have to work 
for, say, a plasma TV. Another reason for my skepticism is that for 99 percent of human history, societies were most 
probably strikingly unhierarchical. This is based on the fact that contemporary hunter-gatherer bands are remarkably 
egalitarian.
But my skepticism is most strongly anchored in two reasons having to do with the complexity of the human psyche. 
First, humans can belong to a number of different ranking systems simultaneously, and idea lly are excelling in at least 
one of them (and thus, may be giving the greatest psychological weight to that one). So, the lowly subordinate in the 
mailroom of the big corporation may, after hours, be deri ving tremendous prestige and self-esteem from being the 
deacon of his church, or the captain of her weekend softball team, or may be at the top of the class at the adult-Page 185 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmextension school. One person's highly empowering dominance hierarchy may be a mere 9-to-5 irrelevancy to the 
person in the next cubicle, and this will greatly skew results.
And most important, people put all sorts of spin inside their heads about ranks. Consider a marathon being observed 
by a Martian scientist studying physiology and rank in humans. The obvious thing to do is keep track of the order in 
which people finish the race. Runner 1 dominates 5, who clear ly dominates 5,000. But what if runner 5,000 is a couch 
potato who took up running just a few months ago, who half expected to keel over from a coronary by mile 13 and 
instead finished— sure, hours after the crowds wandered off—but finished, exhausted and glowing. And what if 
runner 5 had spent the previous week r eading in the sports section that someone of their world-class quality should 
certainly finish in the top th ree, maybe even blow away the field. No Ma rtian on earth could predict correctly who is 
going to feel exultantly dominant afterward.
People are as likely to race against themse lves, their own previous best time, as against some external yardstick. This 
can be seen in the corporate world as well. An artificial example:  the kid in the mailroom
is doing a fabulous job and is rewarded, implausibly, with a $50,000 a year salary. A senior vice president screws up 
big-time and is punished, even more implausibly, with a $50, 001 a year salary. By the pers pective of that Martian, or 
even by a hierarchically mind ed wildebeest, it's obvious that  the vice president is in bette r shape to acquire the nuts 
and berries needed for survival. But you can guess who is going to be going to work contentedly and who is going to 
be making angry phone calls to a headhunter from the cell phone in the BMW. Humans can play internal, 
rationalizing games with rank based on  their knowledge of what determined their placement. Cons ider the following 
fascinating example: guys who win at some  sort of competitive interaction typically show at least a small rise in their 
circulating testosterone levels—unless they cons ider the win to have come from sheer luck.
When you put all those qualifiers together, I think the net result is some pretty shaky ground when it comes to 
considering human rank and its relevance to the stress-response. Except in one realm. If you want to figure out the 
human equivalent of being a low-ranking social animal, an equivalent that car ries with it atypically high rates of 
physical and psychological stressors, which is ecologically meaningful in that it's not just about how many hours you 
have to work to buy an iPod, which is likely to overwhelm most of the rationalizations and alternative hierarchies that 
one can muster—check  out a poor human.
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS, STRESS, AND DISEASE
If you want to see an example of chronic stress, study poverty. Being poor involves lots of physical stressors. Manual 
labor and a greater risk of work-related accidents. Maybe even two or three exhausting jobs, complete with chronic 
sleep deprivation. Maybe walking to work, walking to the laundromat, walking back from  the market with the heavy 
bag of groceries, instead of driving an  air-conditioned car. Maybe too little mone y to afford a new mattress that might 
help that aching back, or some more hot water in the show er for that arthritic throb; and, of course, maybe some 
hunger thrown in as well.... The list goes on and on.
Naturally, being poor brings disproportionate amounts of psychological stressors as well. Lack of control, lack of 
predictability: numbing work on an assembly line, an occupational career spent taking orders or going from one 
temporary stint to the next. The first
one laid off when economic ti mes are bad—and studies show that the dele terious effects of unemployment on health 
begin not at the time the person is laid off, but when the me re threat of it first occurs. Wondering if the money will 
stretch to the end of the month. Wondering if the rickety car will get you to tomorrow's job interview on time. How's 
this for an implication of lack of control: one study of the working poor showed that they were less likely to comply 
with their doctors' orders to take antihypertensive diuretics (drugs that lower blood pressure by making you urinate) 
because they weren't allowed to go to the bathroom at work as often as th ey needed to when taking the drugs.
As a next factor, being poor means that you often can't cope with stressors very efficiently. Because you have no 
resources in reserve, you can never plan  for the future, and can only respond to the present crisis. And when you do, 
your solutions in the present come with a whopping great price later on—metaphorically, or maybe not so 
metaphorically, you're always paying the rent with money fr om a loan shark. Everything has to be reactive, in the 
moment. Which increases the odds that y ou'll be in even worse shape to deal with the next stressor— growing strong 
from adversity is mostly a luxury for those who are better off.
Along with all of that stress and reduced means of coping, poverty brings with it  a marked lack of outlets. Feeling a 
little stressed with life and considerin g a relaxing vacation, buying an exercy cle, or taking some classical guitar 
lessons to get a little peace of mind? Pr obably not. Or how about qu itting that stressful job a nd taking some time off at 
home to figure out what you're doing with your life? Not when there's an extended family counting on your paycheck 
and no money in the bank. Feeling like at least jogging re gularly to get some exercise and let off some steam? 
Statistically, a poor person is far more likely to live in a crime-riddled neighborhood, and jogging may wind up being 
a hair-raising stressor.Page 186 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmFinally, along with long hours of work and kids to take care of comes a serious lack of social support—if everyone 
you know is working two or three jobs, you and your loved ones, despite the best of intentions, aren't going to be 
having much time to sit around being supportive. Thus, poverty generally equals more stressors—and though the 
studies are mixed as to whether or not the poor have more major catastrophic stressors, they have plenty more chronic 
daily stressors.
All these hardships suggest that low socioeconomic status (SES — typically measured by a combination of income, 
occupation, housing
conditions, and education) should be a ssociated with chronic activ ation of the stress-response. Only a few studies 
have looked at this, but they support this view. One concerned school kids in Montreal, a city with fairly stable 
communities and low crime. In six- and eight-year-old children, there was alr eady a tendency for lower-SES kids to 
have elevated glucocorticoid levels. By  age ten, there was a step-wise gradient , with low-SES kids averaging almost 
double the circulating glucocorticoids as the highest SES kids. Another example concerns people in Lithuania. In 
1978, men in Lithuania, then part of the USSR, had the same  mortality rates for coronary heart disease as did men in 
nearby Sweden. By 1994, following the disintegration of the Soviet Union, Lithuanians had four times the Swedish 
rate. In 1994 Sweden, SES was not related to glucocorticoid levels, whereas in 1994 Lithuania, it was strongly related.
Findings like these suggest that being poor is associated with  more stress-related diseases. As a first pass, let's just ask 
whether low SES is associated with mo re diseases, period. And is it ever.
The health risk of poverty turns out to be a huge effect, the biggest risk factor there is in all of behavioral medicine—
in other words, if you have a bunch of people of the sa me gender, age, and ethnicity and you want to make some 
predictions about who is going to live how long, the single most useful fact to know is each person's SES. If you want 
to increase the odds of living a long and healthy life, don't  be poor. Poverty is associat ed with increased risks of 
cardiovascular disease, respiratory diseas e, ulcers, rheumatoid diso rders, psychiatric diseases, and a number of types 
of cancer, just to name a few.* It is a ssociated with higher rates of people judging themselves to be of poor health, of 
infant mortality, and of mortality due to all causes. Moreov er, lower SES predicts lower birth weight, after controlling 
for body size—and we know from chapter 6 the lifelong effects of low birth weight. In other words, be born poor but 
hit the lottery when you're three weeks
* As but one example, across the countrie s of Europe, socioeconomic status accounts for 68 percent of the variance as to who ge ts a stroke. 
However, not all diseases are more prevalen t among the poor, and, fascinatingly, some are even more common among the wealthy. M elanoma is an 
example, suggesting that sun expos ure in a lounge chair may have different diseas e risks than getting your  neck red from stoope d physical labor (or 
that a huge percentage of poor people laboring away in the sun have a fair amount of melanin in their skin, if you know what I mean). Or multiple 
sclerosis, and a few other autoimmune diseases and, during its heyday, polio. Or "hospitalism," a pediatric disease of the 1930 s in which infants 
would waste away in hospitals. It is now u nderstood that it was mostly due to lack of contact and sociality—and kids who would wind up in poorer 
hospitals were less subject to this, since the hospitals couldn't afford state-of-the -art incubators, necessitating that staff actually hold them.
old, spend the rest of your life double-dating with Donald Tr ump, and you're still going to have a statistical increase in 
some realms of disease risk  for the rest of your life.
Is the relationship between SES and health just some little statistical hiccup in the dat a? No—it can be a huge effect. 
In the case of some of those diseases se nsitive to SES, if you cling to the lowest rungs of the socioeconomic ladder, it 
can mean ten times the prevalence compared  with those perched on top.* Or stated another way, this translates into a 
five- to ten-year difference in life ex pectancy in some countries when comp aring the poorest and wealthiest, and 
decades' worth of diff erences when comparing subgroups of the poorest and wealthiest.
Findings such as these go back centur ies. For example, one study of men in England and Wales demonstrated a steep 
SES gradient in mortality in every d ecade of the twentieth century. This has a critical implication that has been 
pointed out by Robert Evans of the University of British Columbia: the diseases that people were dying of most 
frequently a century ago are dramatical ly different from the most common ones  now. Different causes of death, but 
same SES gradient, same relationship between SES and heal th. Which tells you that the gradient arises less from 
disease than from social class. Thus, writes Evans, the "roots [of the SES h ealth gradient] lie beyond the reach of 
medical therapy."
So SES and health are tightly linked. What direction is the causa lity? Maybe being poor sets you up for poor health. 
But maybe it's the other way around, where being sickly sets you up for spiraling down into poverty. The latter 
certainly happens, but most of the relationship is due to the former. This is demonstrated by showing that your SES at 
one point in life predicts important features of your hea lth later on. For example, pove rty early in life has adverse 
effects on health forever after—harking b ack to chapter 6 and the fetal origins of  adult disease. On e remarkable study 
involved a group of elderly nuns. They took their vows as young adults, and spent the rest of their lives sharing the 
same diet, same health care, same housing, and so on. De spite controlling for all these variables, in old age their 
patterns of disease, of dementia, and of longevity were s till predicted by the SES status  they had when they became 
nuns more than half  a century before.Page 187 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThus, SES influences health, and the gr eater cumulative percentage of your life you've spent poor, the more of an 
adverse impact on
* A number of writers in the field have noted  (even pre-DiCaprio) that there was a stri ct SES gradient as to who survived on th e 
Titanic.
health.* Why should SES influence health ? A century ago in the United States, or today in a developing country, the 
answer would be obvious. It would be about poor people getting more infectious diseases, less food, and having an 
astronomically higher infant mortality rate. But with our shift toward the modern prevalence of slow, degenerative 
diseases, the answers have shifted as well.
THE PUZZLE OF
HEALTH CARE ACCESS
Let's start with the most plausible explanation. In the Unit ed States, poor people (with or without health insurance) 
don't have the same access to medical care as do the wealthy. This includes fewe r preventive check-u ps with doctors, 
a longer lag time for testing when something bothersome has been noted, and less adequa te care when something has 
actually been discovered, especi ally if the medical care invo lves an expensive, fancy t echnique. As one example of 
this, a 1967 study showed that the poorer you are judged to be (based on the neighborhood you live in, your home, 
your appearance), the less likely paramedics  are to try to revive you on the way to  the hospital. In more recent studies, 
for the same severity of a stroke, SE S influenced your likelih ood of receiving physical , occupational, or speech 
therapy, and how long you waited until undergoing surgery to  repair the damaged blood vessel that caused the stroke.
This sure seems like it should explai n the SES gradient. Make the health car e system equitable, socialize that 
medicine, and away would go th at gradient. But it can't be only about differential health  care access, or even mostly 
about it.
For starters, consider countries in which poverty is robustly associated with increased prev alence of disease: Australia, 
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Fr ance, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Z ealand, the former So viet Union, Spain, 
Sweden, the United Kin gdom, and, of course, the U.S. of A. Social ize the medical care syst em, socialize the whole 
country, turn it into a worker's paradi se, and you still get the gradient. In a place like England, the SES gradient has 
gotten worse over this century, despite the imposition of universal health car e allowing everyone equal health care 
access.
* What that means is that you're not completely sunk if you're born poor; social mobility  helps to some extent.
You could cynically and correctly point out that systems of wonderfu lly egalitarian health care access are probably 
egalitarian in theory only—even the Swedish health care system is likely to be at least a smidgen more attentive to the 
wealthy industrialist, sick doc tor, or famous jock than to some no-accoun t poor person cluttering up a clinic. Some 
people always get more of their share of  equality than others. But in at least one study of people enrolled in a prepaid 
health plan, where medical fac ilities were available to all participants, poo rer people had more car diovascular disease, 
despite making more use of the medical resources.
A second vote against the importance of differential health care access is because the relationsh ip forms the term I've 
been using, namely, a gradient. It's not the case that only po or people are less healthy th an everyone else. Instead, for 
every step lower in the SES ladder, ther e is worse health (and the lower you ge t in the SES hierarchy, the bigger is 
each step of worsening health).  This was a point made screamingly clear in the most celebrated study in the field, the 
Whitehall studies of Michael Marmot of University Co llege of London. Marmot co nsidered a system where 
gradations in SES status ar e so clear that occupational  rank practically comes stam ped on people's foreheads—the 
British civil service system, which ranges from unskilled blue-collar workers to high -powered executives. Compare 
the highest and lowest rungs and there's a fourfold difference in ra tes of cardiac disease morta lity. Remember, this is 
in a system where everyone has roughly  equal health care access, is paid a liv ing wage, and, very  important in the 
context of the effects of unpredictability, is highly likely to continue to be able to earn that living wage.
A final vote against the health care acces s argument: the gradient exists for di seases that have nothing to do with 
access. Take a young person and, each day, scrupulously, give her a good medical exam ination, check her vitals, 
peruse her blood, run her on a treadmill, give her a stern l ecture about good health habits, and then, for g ood measure, 
centrifuge her a bit, and she is still just as  much at risk for some diseases as if she hadn't gotten all that attention. Poor 
people are still more likely to get thos e access-proof diseases. Theodo re Pincus of Va n-derbilt Univers ity has carefully 
documented the existence of an SES grad ient for two of those diseases, juven ile diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis.
Thus, the leading figures in this field all seem to rule out health care access as a ma jor part of the story. This is not to 
rule it out completely (let alone suggest that we not bother trying to establish universalPage 188 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe Whitehall Study, Mo rtality by Professional  Level of Follow-up.
health care access). As evidence, sweaty cap italist America has the worst gradient , while the sociali zed Scandinavian 
countries have the weakest. But they still have hefty grad ients, despite their socialism.  The main cause has to be 
somewhere else. Thus, we move on to the next most plausible explanation.
RISK FACTORS AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Poorer people in westernized societies ar e more likely to drink and smoke excessive ly (sufficiently so that it's been 
remarked that smoking is soon going to be almost exclusively a low-SES activity) . These excesses take us back to the 
last chapter and having trouble "just saying no" when there are few yes's. Moreover, the poor are more likely to have 
an unhealthy diet—in the developing world, being poor means having trouble affording food, while in the westernized 
world, it means having trouble affording healthy food. Thanks to industrialization, fewer jobs in our society involve 
physical exertion and, when combined with the costs of membership in some tony health club, the poor get less 
exercise. They're more likely to be obe se, and in an apple-ish way. They are less likely to use a seat belt, wear a 
motorcycle helmet, own a car with air bags. They are more likely to  live near a toxic
dump, be mugged, have inadequate heat in the winter, live in crowded conditions (thereby increasing exposure to 
infectious diseases). The list seems endles s, and they all adversely impact health.
Being poor is statistically likely to come with another risk factor-being poorly educated. Thus, maybe poor people 
don't understand, don't know about the risk factors they are being exposed to, or the health-promoting factors they are 
lacking—even if it is within their power to do somethin g, they aren't informed. As one example that boggles me, 
substantial numbers of people are apparently not aware that cigarettes do bad things to you, and the studies show that 
these aren't folks too busy working on their doctoral dissert ations to note some public health trivia. Other studies 
indicate that, for example, poor  women are the least likely to know of th e need for Pap smears, thus increasing their 
risk for cervical cancer.* The intertwining of poverty and poor education probably explains the high rates of poor 
people who, despite their poverty, could still be eating some what more healthfully, using s eat belts or crash helmets, 
and so on, but don't. And it probably helps to explain why poor people are less likely to comply with some treatment 
regime prescribed for them that they can actually afford—they are less likely to have understood the instructions or to 
think that following them is important. Moreover, a high degree of education generalizes to better problem-solving 
skills across the board. Statistically, be ing better educated predicts that your community of friends and relatives is 
better educated as well, with  those attendant advantages.
However, the SES gradient isn't much a bout risk factors and protective factors. To show this requires some powerful 
statistical techniques in which you see if an effect still exis ts after you control for one or more of these factors. For 
example, the lower your SES, the greater your risk of lung cancer. But the lower your SES, the greater the likelihood 
of smoking. So control for smoking—comparing only peop le who smoke—does the inci dence of lung cancer still 
increase with declining SES? Take it one step further—for the same amount of smoking, does l ung cancer incidence 
still increase? For the same amount of smoking and drinking, does... and so on. Thes e types of analyses show that 
these risk factors matter—as Robert Evans has written, "Drinking sewage is probably unwise even for Bill Gates." 
They justPage 189 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm* In a subtle but striking complication to this story, education actua lly worsens health inequality. As medical research genera tes new advances in 
health care and preventive medicine, it is the educated who first hear about it, appr eciate it, and adopt it, and thus differen tially benefit from it, 
amplifying the health gradient even more.
don't matter that much. For example, in the Whitehall stud ies, smoking, cholesterol levels, blood pressure, and level 
of exercise explain away only about a th ird of the SES gradient. For the same ri sk factors and same lack of protective 
factors, throw in poverty and you're more likely to get sick.
So differential exposure to risk factors or protective factors does not explain a whole lot. This point is brought home 
in another way. Compare countries that differ in wealth . One can assume that being in  a wealthier country gives you 
more opportunities to buy protective factors and to avoid risk  factors. For example, you fi nd the least pollution in very 
poor and very w ealthy countries; the former  because they are nonindustrial and th e latter because they either do it 
cleanly or farm it out to someone else. Yet, when you consider  the wealthiest quarter or so countries on earth, there is 
no relationship between a country's weal th and the health of its citizens.* This is a poin t heavily emphasized by 
Stephen Bezruchka of the University of Washington, in considering the United States—despite the most expensive 
and sophisticated health care system in  the world, there's an unconscionable number of less wealthy nations whose 
citizens live longer, health ier lives than our own.+
So out go major roles for health care access, and risk factors. This is wher e things get tense at the scientific 
conferences. Much of this book has been about how a certain style of "mainstream" medicine, overly focused on how 
disease is exclusively about viruses, bacteria, and mutations, has grudgingly had to make room for the relevance of 
psychological factors, includ ing stress. In a similar way, among the "social epidemiologists" who think about the 
SES/health gradients, the mainstream vi ew has long focused on health care access and risk factors. And thus, they too 
have had to make room for psychological factors. Including stress. Big-time.
* This may seem like an aside, but is as  central a point as any in this book. Once you get past the 25 percent poorest countrie s on earth, there's no 
relationship between the wealth of  a country and the percen tage of its citizens who say they are happy. (How many countries wer e on the list whose 
citizens are at least as happy, if not happ ier, than Americans, despite being in less wealthy countries? Ten, most with social welfare systems. And 
unhappiness? The dozen most unhappy are all ex-sta tes of the Soviet Union, or of Eastern Europe.)
+ In 1960, the United States was 13th in lif e expectancy, pretty lousy in  and of itself. By 1997, it was 25th. As one example, Greeks, who have 
approximately half the average income of Americans, have a longer life expectancy.
STRESS AND THE SES GRADIENT
As discussed, the poor certainly have a hugely disproportionate share of both daily and major stressors. If you've 
gotten this far into this book and aren't wondering whether stress has something to do with the SES health gradient, 
you should get your money back. Does it?
In the last edition of this book, I argued for a major role for stress based on three points. First, the poor have all those 
chronic daily stressors. Second, when on e examines the SES gradient for indivi dual diseases, the strongest gradients 
occur for diseases with the greatest sens itivity to stress, such as heart dis ease, diabetes, Metabolic syndrome, and 
psychiatric disorders. Finally, once you've rounded up the usual suspects —health care access and risk factors—and 
ruled them out as being of prime importance, what else is there to  pin the SES gradient on? Sunspots?
Kinda flimsy. With that sort of evidence, the social epidem iologists were willing to let in some of those psychologists 
and stress physiologists, but through the back door, and—Cook, find them something to eat in the kitchen, if you 
please.
So that was the stress argument a half decade back. But sin ce then, striking new findings  make the stress argument 
very solid.
BEING POOR VERSUS FEELING POOR
A central concept of this book is that  stress is heavily rooted in psychology once you are dealing with organisms who 
aren't being chased by predators, and who have adequate shelter and sufficient  calories to sustain good health. Once 
those basic needs are met, it is an inevit able fact that if everyone is poor, and I mean everyone, then no one is. In order 
to understand why stress and psychological factors have so much to do with the SES/health gradient, we have to begin 
with the obvious fact that it is never the case that everyone is poor thereby making no one poor. This brings us to a 
critical point in this field—the SES/health gradient is not r eally about a distribution that bottoms out at being poor. It's 
not about being poor. It's about feeling poor, which is to say, it's about feeling poorer than others around you.
Beautiful work regarding this has been carried out by Nancy Adler of the University of Calif ornia at San Francisco. 
Instead of just looking at the relationship between SES and health, Adler looks at what healthPage 190 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmhas to do with what someone thinks and feels their SES is—their "subjective SES. " Show someone a ladder with ten 
rungs on it and ask them, "In society, where on this ladder would you rank yourself in terms of how well you're 
doing?" Simple.
First off, if people were purely accurate  and rational, the answers across a group should average out to the middle of 
the ladder's rungs. But cultural distortions come in—expansive, self-congratulatory European-Americans average out 
at higher than the middle rung (what Adler calls her Lake  Wobegon Effect, where all th e children are above average); 
in contrast, Chinese-American s, from a culture with less chest-thumpi ng individualism, aver age out to below the 
middle rung. So you have to correct for those biases. In addition, given that you're asking how people feel about 
something, you need to control for people who have an illness of feeling, namely depression.
Once you've done that, look at wh at health measures have to do with one's subjective SES. Amazingly , it is at least as 
good a predictor of these heal th measures as is one's actua l SES, and, in some cases, it is even better. Cardiovascular 
measures, metabolism measures, glucocorticoid levels, obesity in kids. Feeling poor in our socioeconomic world 
predicts poor health.
This really isn't all that surprising . We can be an immensely competitive, covetous, invidious species, and not 
particularly rational in how we make those comparisons. He re's an example from a real m unrelated to this subject—
show a bunch of women volunteers a series of pictures of attractive female models and, afterward, they feel in a worse 
mood, with lower self-esteem, than before  seeing the pictures (and even more de pressingly, show those same pictures 
to men and afterward what declines is th eir stated satisfaction with their wives).
So it's not about being poor. It's abou t feeling poor. What's th e difference? Adler shows th at subjective SES is built 
around education, income, and occupational position (in ot her words, the building blocks of subjective SES), plus 
satisfaction with standard of living and feeling of financia l security about the future. Those last two measures are 
critical. Income may tell you something (but certainly not everything) about SES; satisfaction with standard of living 
is the world of people who are poor and happy and zillionaires who are still grasping for more. All that messy stuff 
that dominates this book. And what is "feelings about fina ncial security" tapping into? A nxiety. So SES reality plus 
your satisfaction with that SES plus  your confidence about how predictable your SES is are collectively better 
predictors of health than SES alone.
This is not a hard and fast rule, and Ad ler's most recent work shows that subjective SES is not necessarily that great of 
a predictor in certain ethnic groups—stay tuned for more , no doubt. But overall, this strikes me as immensely 
impressive—when you're past the realm of worrying about ha ving adequate shelter and food, being poor is not as bad 
for you as feeling poor.
POVERTY VERSUS POVERTY AMID PLENTY
In many ways, an even more accurate tag line for this whole phenomenon is, It's about being made to feel poor. This 
point is made clearer when co nsidering the second body of re search in this area, champi oned by Richard Wilkinson of 
the University of Nottingham in England. Wilkinson took  a top-down approach, looking at the "How are you doing?" 
ladder from the societal level.
Let's consider how answers to "How are you doing?" can be distributed along the ladder. Suppose there is a business 
with ten employees. Each earns $5.50 an hour. Thus the company is paying out a total of $55/hour in salary, and the 
average income is $5.50/hour. With that distribution, the wealthiest employee is making $5.50/hour, or 10 percent of 
the total income ($5.50/$55).
Meanwhile, in the next business, there are also ten employees. One earns $l/hour, the next $2/hour, the next $3, and so 
on. Once again, the company pays a total of $55/hour in sa lary, and the average salary is again $5.50/hour. But now 
the wealthiest employee, earning $10/ hour, takes home 18 percent of the total income ($10/$55).
Now, in the third company, nine of the employees earn $l/hour, and the tenth earns $46/hour. Again, the company 
pays a total of $55/ hour, and the average salary is $5.50/hour. And here, the wealthiest employee takes home 84 
percent of the total income ($46/$55).
What we have here are businesses of increasingly unequal incomes. What Wilkinson and others have shown is that 
poverty is not only a predictor of poor health but, independent of absolute income, so is poverty amid plenty—the 
more income inequality there is in a societ y, the worse the health and mortality rates.
This has been shown repeatedly, and at multiple levels. For example, income inequality predicts higher infant 
mortality rates across a bunch of European countries. Income  inequality predicts mortality rates across all ages (except 
the elderly) in the United States,Page 191 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmwhether you consider this at the level of states or cities. In a world of science often filled with wishy-washy data, the 
effect is extremely reliable—income inequality across American  states is a really strong predictor of mortality rates 
among working men. When you compare the most egalitarian state, New Hamp shire, with the least egalitarian, 
Louisiana, the latter has about a 60 perc ent higher mortality rate.* Finally, Canada is both markedly more egalitarian 
and healthier than the United States —despite being a "poorer" country.
Amid extraordinary findings like that, the relationship between  income inequality and poor health doesn't seem to be 
universal. Note how flat th e curve is for Canada—moreover, you don't find it when considering adults throughout 
Western Europe, particularly in countrie s with well-established social welfare systems like Denmark. In other words, 
you probably can't pick up this effect when comparing individual parishes in Copenhagen because the overall pattern 
is so egalitarian in a place like that. Bu t it's a reasonably robust relationship in the United Kingdom, while the flagship 
for the health/income inequality relationship is the United St ates, where the top 1 percent of the SES ladder controls 
nearly 40 percent of the wealth, and it's a huge effect (and pe rsists even after co ntrolling for race).
These studies of nations, states, and ci ties raise the issue of whom someone is  comparing themselv es to when they 
think of where they are on a how-are-yo u-doing ladder. Adler tries to get at this  by asking her question twice. First, 
you're asked to place yourself on the ladde r with respect to "society as a whol e," and second, with respect to "your 
immediate community." The top-down Wilkinson types get at this by comparing the predictive power of data at the 
national, state, and city levels. Neither l iterature has given a clear answer yet, bu t both seem to suggest that it is one's 
immediate community that is most important. As Tip O'Neil , the consummate politician, used to say, "All politics is 
local."
This is obviously the case in traditional settings where al l people know about is the immediate community of their 
village—look at how many chickens he has, I'm such a loser. But thanks to urbanization, mobility, and the media that 
makes for a global village, something absolutely unprecedented can now occur—we  can now be made to feel poor, or 
poorly about ourselves, by people we don't even know. You can feel impoverished by the clothes of someone you pass 
in a midtown crowd, by the unseen dr iver of a new car on the freeway, by
* The most egalitarian states tend to be in New England, prairie states like the Da kotas or Iowa, and Utah; the least egalitari an are in the Deep 
South, plus Nevada.
Bill Gates on the evening news, even by a fictional character in a movie. Our perceived SES may arise mostly out of 
our local community, but our modern world makes it possible to have our noses rubbed in it by a local community 
that stretches around the globe.
Income inequality seems really important for making sens e of the SES/health gradient. But maybe it isn't that 
important. Maybe the ine quality business is just a red herring built ar ound the fact that places  with big inequalities 
tend to be poor places as well (in ot her words, back to the key thing being "poverty," instead of "poverty amid 
plenty"). But, control for absolute income, and the inequality data still stand.
There's a second potential problem (warning: skip this para graph if you're math-phobic—as a synopsis of the plot, the 
income inequality hypothesis is menaced by math villains but is saved in  a cliffhanger finish). Moving up the SES 
ladder is associated with better health  (by whatever measure you are using) but , as noted, each incremental step gets 
smaller. A mathematical way of stating this is that the SES/health relationsh ip forms an asymptote—going from very 
poor to lower middle class involves a steep rise in health that then tends to flatten out as you go into the upper SES 
range. So if you examine w ealthy nations, you are examining countries wh ere SES averages out to somewhere in the 
flat part of the curve. Therefore, co mpare two equally wealthy nations (that is to say, which have the same average 
SES on the flat part of the curve) that differ in income inequality. By definition, the nation with the greater inequality 
will have more data points coming from the steeply declini ng part of the curve, and thus  must have a lower average 
level of health. In this scenario, the income inequality phe nomenon doesn't really reflect some feature of society as a 
whole, but merely emerges, as a mathem atical inevitability, from individual data points. However, some fairly fancy 
mathematical modeling studies show that this artifact can't explai n all of the health-income inequality relationship in 
the United States.
But, alas, there might be a third problem. Suppose in some society the poor health of the poor was more sensitive to 
socioeconomic factors than th e good health of the rich. Now suppose you make income distribution in that society 
more equitable by transferring some wealth from the wealthy to the poor.* Maybe by doing that, you make the health 
of the wealthy a little worse, an d the health of the poor a lot
* Appropriately, the proportion of the society's wealth that must be  transferred in order to make for completely equal income i s 
termed the Robin Hood index.
better. A little worse in the few wealthy plus a lot better in the numerous poor and, overall, you've got a healthier 
society. That wouldn't be very interesting in the context of stress and psychological factors. But Wilkinson makes an 
extraordinary point—in socie ties that have more income equality, both the poor and the wealthy are healthier than Page 192 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmtheir counterparts in a less equal soci ety with the same average income. There is something more profound happening 
here.
HOW DOES INCOME INEQUAL ITY AND FEELING POOR TRANSLATE INTO BAD HEALTH?
Income inequality and feeling poor could give rise to bad health through a number of routes. One, pioneered by Ichiro 
Kawachi of Harvard University, focuses on how income inequality makes for a psychologically crappier, more 
stressful life for everyone. He draws heavily upon a concept in sociology calle d "social capital." While "financial 
capital" says something about the depth and range of financial resources you can draw on in troubled times, social 
capital refers to the same in the social  realm. By definition, social capital o ccurs at the level of a community, rather 
than at the level of individuals or individual social networks.
What makes for social capital?  A community in which there is a lot of volunteerism and numerous organizations that 
people can join which make them feel like they're part of something bigger than  themselves. Where people don't lock 
their doors. Where people in the community would stop ki ds from vandalizing a car ev en if they don't know whose 
car it is. Where kids don't try to vandali ze cars. What Kawachi shows is that the more income inequality in a society, 
the lower the social capital, and the lower the social cap ital, the worse the health.
Obviously, "social capital" can be measured in a lot of wa ys and is still evolving as a hard-nosed measure, but, 
broadly, it incorporates elements of trust, reciprocity, l ack of hostility, heavy participation in organizations for a 
common good (ranging from achieving fun—a bowling league—to more serious things—tenant organizations or a 
union) and those organizations accompli shing something. Most studies get at it with two m easures: how people 
answer a question like, "Do you think most people would try to take advantage of you if they got a chance, or would 
they try to be fair?" and how many organizations people belong to. Measures like those tell you that on the levels of 
states, provinces, cities, and nei ghborhoods, low social capital tends
to mean poor health, poor self-reported health, and high mortality rates.*
Findings such as these make perfect se nse to Wilkinson. In his writing, he em phasizes that trust requires reciprocity, 
and reciprocity requires equality. In co ntrast, hierarchy is about domination, no t symmetry and equality. By definition, 
you can't have a society with both dramat ic income inequality and lots of soci al capital. These findings would also 
have made sense to the late Aaron Antonovsky, who was one of the first to study the SES/health gradient. He stressed 
how damaging it is to health and psyche to be an invisibl e member of society. To rec ognize the extent to which the 
poor exist without feedback, just consider the varied ways that most of us have developed for looking through 
homeless people as we walk past them.
So income inequality, minimal trust, lack of social cohesi on all go together. Which cause s which, and which is most 
predictive of poor health? To figure this out, you need so me fancy statistical techniques called path analysis. An 
example we're comfortable with by now fr om earlier chapters: chronic stress make s for more heart disease. Stress can 
do this by directly increasing blood pressure. But stress al so makes lots of people eat less healthfully. How much is 
the path from stress to heart disease di rectly via blood pressure, and how much by the indirect route of changing diet? 
That's the sort of thing that a path analysis can tell you. And Kawachi's work  shows that the strongest route from 
income inequality (after controlling for absolute income) to poor health is via the social capital measures.
How does lots of social capital turn into better health throughout a community? Less social isolation. More rapid 
diffusion of health information. Potentially, social constraints on publicly unhealthy behaviors. Less psychological 
stress. Better organized groups demanding better public services (and, related to that, another great measure of social 
capital is how many people in a community bother to vote).
So it sounds like a solution to life's ills, including some stress-related ills, is to get into a community with lots of social  
capital. However, as will be touched on in the next chapter, this isn't always  a great thing. Some times, communities 
get tremendous amounts of social capital by having all of their members goose-step to the same thoughts and beliefs 
and behaviors, and don't cotton much to anyone different.
* Even at the level of college campuses —the more social capital on a campus, by these measures , the less binge drinking.
Research by Kawachi and others  shows another feature of income inequality  that translates into more physical and 
psychological stress: the more economica lly unequal a society, the more crime— assault, robbery, and, particularly, 
homicide—and the more gun ownership. Critically, income in equality is consistently a better predictor of crime than 
poverty per se. This has been demonstrated on the level of states, provinces, cities, neighborhoods, even individual 
city blocks. And just as we saw in chapter 13 when we looked at the prevalence of di splacement aggression, poverty 
amid plenty predicts more crime— but not against the wealthy. The have-nots turn upon the have-nots.
Meanwhile, Robert Evans (University of British Columbia), John Lynch, and George Kaplan (the latter two both of 
the University of Michigan) offer another route linking income inequality to poor health, once again via stress. This Page 193 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmpathway is one that, once you grasp it, is so demoralizing that you immediately want to man the barricades and sing 
revolutionary songs from Les Miz. It goes as follows:
If you want to improve health and quality of life, and decr ease the stress, for the average person in a society, you do 
so by spending money on public goods—better public tran sit, safer streets, cleaner water, better public schools, 
universal health care. The bigger the income inequality is in a society, the greater the financial distance between the 
wealthy and the average. The bigger the distance between the wealthy and the av erage, the less benefit the wealthy 
will feel from expenditures on the public good. Instead, they would derive much more benefit by spending the same 
(taxed) money on their private good—a be tter chauffeur, a gated community, bo ttled water, private schools, private 
health insurance. As Evans writes, "The more unequal ar e incomes in a society, the more pronounced will be the 
disadvantages to its better-off members from public expenditure, and the more resources will those members have 
[available to them] to mount effectiv e political opposition." He no tes how this "secession of the wealthy" pushes 
toward "private affluence and public squalor." And more public squalor means more of the daily stressors and 
allostatic load that drives down health  for everyone. For the wealth y, this is because of the costs of walling themselves 
off from the rest of society, and for the rest of society, this is  because they have to live in it.
So this is a route by which an unequal society makes for a more stressful reality. But this route certainly makes for 
more psychological stress as well—if the skew in society bi ases the increasingly wealthy toward wanting to avoid the 
public expenditures that would improve everyone else's quality of life... well, that might have some bad effects on 
trust, hostility, crime, and so on.
So we've got income inequality, low soci al cohesion and social capital, class tens ions, and lots of crime all forming an 
unhealthy cluster. Let's see a grim exam ple of how these pieces come  together. By the late 1980s, life expectancy in 
Eastern Bloc countries was less than in every Western European country. As anal yzed by Evans, these were societies 
in which there was a fair equity of income distribution, but a highly unequal distribution of freedoms of movement, 
speech, practice of beliefs, and so on. And what has happene d to Russia since the dissolutio n of the Soviet Union? A 
massive increase in income inequality  and crime, a decline in  absolute wealth—and an overall decline in life 
expectancy that is unprecedented in an industri alized society.
One more grim example of how this works. America: enor mous wealth, enormous income inequality, high crime, the 
most heavily armed nation on earth. And markedly low levels of social capital— it is virtually the constitutional right 
of an American to be mobile and anonymous. Show your independence. Move across the country for any job 
opportunity. (He lives across th e street from his parents? Isn't that a lit tle, er, stunted?) Get a new accent, get a new 
culture, get a new name, unlist your phone number, reboot your life. All of which are the antitheses of developing 
social capital. This helps to  explain something subtle about the health-income inequality relationship. Compare the 
United States and Canada. As shown, th e former has more income inequality and worse health. But restrict your 
analysis to a subset of atypical Amer ican systems chosen to match the low inequality of Canada—and those U.S. 
cities still have worse health and a steeper SES/ health gradient. Some detailed anal yses show what this is about: it's 
not just that America is a markedly une qual society when it comes to income. It 's that even for the same degree of 
worsening income inequality, so cial capital is driven down fu rther in the United States.
Our American credo is that people are willing to tolerate a so ciety with miserably low levels of social capital, so long 
as there can be massive income inequality ... with the hope that they will soon be sitting at the top of this steep 
pyramid. Over the last quarter-century, poverty and income  inequality have steadily ri sen, and every social capital 
measure of trust, community participation, and voter part icipation has declined.* And what about Amer ican health? 
We have disparity
* The political scientist Robert Pu tnam of Harvard coined his famous metaphor fo r this spreading American  anomie: "bowling alon e." In recent 
decades, an increasing number of Americans bowl, but there are fewer people partic ipating in that quintessential American socia l phenomenon, 
bowling leagues.
between the wealth of our nation and the health of our citizens that is also unprecedented. And getting worse.
This is pretty depressing stuff, given its implications. Ad ler, writing around the time wh en universal health insurance 
first became a frontpage issue (as was th e question of whethe r Hillary's hairstyle made her a more or less effective 
advocate for it), concluded that such universal coverage would "have a minor impact on SES-related inequalities in 
health." Her conclusion is anything but reactionary. Instead, it says that if you want to change the SES gradient, it's 
going to take something a whole lot bigger than rigging up insurance so that everyone can drop in regularly on a 
friendly small-town doc out of Norman Rockwell. Poverty, and the poor health of the poor,  is about much more than 
simply not having enough money* It's about the stressors caused in a society that tolerates leaving so many of its 
members so far behind.
This is relevant to an even larger depressing thought. I initially reviewed what social rank has to do with health in 
nonhuman primates. Do low-ranking monkeys have a dispropo rtionate share of disease, more stress-related disease? 
And the answer was, "Well, it 's actually not that simple." It depends on the sort of society th e animal lives in, its 
personal experience of that society, its coping skills, its pe rsonality, the availability of social support. Change some of Page 194 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmthose variables and the rank/health gradient  can shift in the exact opposite direction. This is the sort of finding that 
primatologists revel in—look how comp licated and subtle my animals are.
The second half of this chapter looked at humans. Do poor humans have a disproportionate share of disease? The 
answer was "Yes, yes, over and over." Rega rdless of gender or age or race. In societies with  universal health care and 
those without. In societies that  are ethnically homogenous and those rife with ethnic tensions. In societies in which 
illiteracy is widespread and those in which it has been virtually banished. In those in which infant mortality has been 
plummeting and in some wealthy, industrialized societies in which rates have inexcusably been climbing. And in 
societies in which the central mythology is  a capitalist credo of "Living well is the best revenge" and those in which it 
is a socialist anthem of "From each according to his ability, to each a ccording to his needs."
What does this dichotomy between our animal cousins and us  signify? The primate relation ship is nuanced and filled 
with qualifiers;
* Evans makes this point by noti ng, "Most graduate students have had the experi ence of having very little money, but not of pov erty. They are very 
different things."
the human relationship is a sledgehammer that obliterates every societal difference. Ar e we humans actually less 
complicated and sophisticated than nonhuman primates? Not ev en the most chauvinistic primatologists holding out 
for their beasts would vote for that conclusion. I think it s uggests something else. Agricultu re is a fairly recent human 
invention, and in many ways it was one of the great stupid moves of all time. Hunter-gatherers have thousands of wild 
sources of food to subsist on. Agriculture changed all that, generating an overwhelming reliance on a few dozen 
domesticated food sources, making you extremely vulnerable to the next famine, the next locust infestation, the next 
potato blight. Agriculture allowed for the stockpiling of surplus resources and thus, inevitably the unequal stockpiling 
of them—stratification of  society and the invention of classes. Thus, it allowed for the invention of poverty. I think 
that the punch line of the pr imate-human difference is that when humans invented poverty, they came up with a way 
of subjugating the low-ranking like nothing ever before seen in the primate world.
18
MANAGING STRESS
By now, if you are not depressed by a ll the bad news in the preceding chapters , you probably have  only been skim-
ming. Stress can wreak havoc with your metabolism, raise
your blood pressure, burst your white blood cells, make
you flatulent, ruin your sex life, and if that's not enough,
possibly damage your brain.* Why don't we throw in the towel
right now?
There is hope. Although it may sneak onto th e scene in a quiet, subtle way, it is  there. This frequently hits me at 
gerontology conferences. I' m sitting there, listening to the umpteenth lecture with the same general tone—the kidney 
expert speaking about how that organ di sintegrates with age, the immunology ex pert on how immunity declines, and 
so on. There is always a bar graph set to 100 percent of Something Or Other for young subjects, with a bar showing 
that the elderly have only 75 percent of the kidney-related Something Or Other of young subjects, 63 percent of the muscle-related Something Or Other, and so on.
Now, there's a critical featur e to those bar graphs. Research typically invo lves the study of populations, rather than 
single individuals one at a time. All those individuals never have the exact same level of Something Or Other—
instead, the bars in a graph represen t the average for each age (see the gra ph on page 386). Suppose one group of
* An additional pathology, for those who are really trivia fans when it comes to stre ss-related disease, is "stress-related alo pecia areata." This is the 
technical term for that extraordinary state of getting so stressed  and terrified by something that  your hair turns white or gra y over the course of days. 
This really does occur. The a nnotated notes at the end of the book detail the surprisingly frequent intersection of alopecia ar eata with law, history, 
and geopolitics.Page 195 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmHenri Matisse, The Dance, oil on canvas, 1910.
three subjects has scores of 19,20, and 21, for an average of 20. Another group may have scores of 10, 20, and 30. 
They also have an average sc ore of 20, but the variability of those scores would be much larger. By the convention of 
science, the bars also contain a measur e of how much variability there is within each age gr oup: the size of the "T" 
above the bar indicates what percentage  of the subjects in the group had scor es within X distance of the average.
One thing that is utterly reliable is that the amount of va riability increases with age—the conditions of the elderly are 
always much more variable than those of the young subjects. What  a drag, you say as a res earcher, because with that 
variance your statistics are not as neat and you have to include more subjects in your aged population to get a reliable 
average. But really think about that fact for a minute. Lo ok at the size of the bars for the young and old subjects, look 
at the size of the T-shaped variance symbols, do some quick calculations,  and suddenly the extr aordinary realization 
hits you—to generate a bar with that large of a variance term, amid the population of, say, fifty subjects, there have to 
be six subjects where Something Or Other is improving with age. Their kidney filtration rates have gotten better, their 
blood pressures have decreased, they do better on memory tests. Suddenly you're not sitting there semi-bored in the 
conference, waiting for the break  to grab some of those unhealthy cinnamon buns. You're on the edge of your seat. 
Who are those six? What are they
Schematic presentation of the fact that  a group of young and old individuals may receive the same average score on a 
given test, yet the variability in the scores is typically greater among the older populations.
doing right? And with all scientific det achment abandoned, how can I do that, too?
This pattern used to be a statistical irritant to gerontolog ists. Now it's the trendiest subj ect in the field: "successful 
aging." Not everyone falls apart miserabl y with age, not every organ system poops out, not everything is bad news.Page 196 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThe same pattern occurs in many other realms in which life tests us. Ten men are released from years spent as 
political hostages. Nine come out troubled, estranged from friends and family, with nightmares, difficulties readapting 
to everyday life; some of those nine will never function well again. Yet invariably there is one guy who comes out 
saying, "Yeah, the beatings were awful, the times they put a gun to my head an d cocked the trigger were the worst in 
my life, of course I would never want to do it again, but it wasn't until I was in captivity that I realized what is really 
important, that I decided to devote the rest of my life to X.  I'm almost grateful." How did he do it? What explains the 
extraordinarily rare Holocau st survivor who came out nearly as me ntally healthy as when she went in?
Consider the physiological studies of people carrying out dangerous, stressful tasks—parachuting, learning to land on 
an aircraft carrier in choppy seas, carryin g out underwater demolition. The studies
show the same pattern: most people ha ve massive stress-responses and a subset are physiologically unflustered.
And then there's that hair-raising, push the envelope, unpredictable world of supermarket lines. You've picked the 
slow one, and your simmering irritation is made worse by the person behind you who looks perfectly happy standing 
there, daydreaming.
Despite the endless ways in which stress can disrupt, we do not all collapse into puddles of stress-related disease and 
psychiatric dysfunction. Of course, we ar e not all exposed to identical external st ressors; but given the same stressors, 
even the same major stressors, we vary  tremendously in how our bodies and psyches cope. This final chapter asks the 
questions born of hope. Who makes up that subset that can cope? How do they do it?  And how can we? Chapter 15 
suggested that some personalities and temperaments aren't well suited to dealing with stress, and it is easy to imagine 
the opposite case that some are. That's true, but this chap ter shows that having the "right" personality doesn't explain 
all successful coping—there's even  hope for the rest of us.
We begin by more systematically examining cases of individuals who just happen to be fabulous at dealing with 
stress.
TALES FROM THE TRENCHES: SOME FOLKS WH O ARE AMAZING AT DEALING WITH STRESS
Successful Aging
Probably the best place to start is with  successful aging, a subject that was cove red at length in chapter 12. Amid a lot 
of good news in that chapter, one partic ularly bleak set of findings had to do  with glucocorticoids. Old rats, recall, 
secrete too much of these hormones—they have elevated levels during basal, non-stressful situations and difficulty 
shutting off secretion at the end of stress. I discussed the evidence that this could arise from damage to the 
hippocampus, the part of the brain that (in addition to playing a role in learning and memory) helps inhibit 
glucocorticoid secretion. Then, to complete the distressing st ory, it was revealed that gl ucocorticoids could hasten the 
death of hippocampal neurons. Furthermore, the tendency of glucocorticoids to damage the hippocampus increases 
the oversecretion of glucocorticoids, which in turn leads to more hippocampal damage, more glucocorticoids, 
spiraling downward.
I proposed that "feed forwar d cascade" model around twenty years ago. It seemed to describe a basic and inevitable 
feature of aging
in the rat, one that seemed important (at least from my provincial persp ective, having just spent eighty hours a week 
studying it in graduate school). I was pretty proud of myself. Then an old friend, Michael Meaney of McGill 
University, did an experiment th at deflated that grandiosity.
Meaney and colleagues studied that cascade in old rats. But they did so mething clever first.  Before starting the 
studies, they tested the memo ry capacity of the rats. As is usual, on th e average these old rats had memory problems, 
compared with young controls. But as usua l, a subset were doing just fine, with no memory impairment whatsoever. 
Meaney and crew split the gro up of old rats into the impaired and the unimpaired. The latter turned out to show no 
evidence at all of that degenerative f eed forward cascade. They had normal glucocorticoid levels basally and after 
stress. Their hippocampi had not lost neurons or lost receptors  for glucocorticoids. All those awful degenerative 
features turned out not to be  an inevitable part of the aging process. All those rats had to do was age successfully.
What was this subset of rats doing right? Oddly, it might have had something to do with their childhoods. If a rat is 
handled during the first few weeks of its life, it secretes less  glucocorticoids as an adult. This generated a syllogism: if 
neonatal handling decreases the amount of glucocorticoids secreted as an ad ult, and such secretion in an adult 
influences the rate of hippocampal degeneration in old age, th en handling a rat in the first few weeks of its life should 
alter the way it ages years later. Meaney's lab and I teamed  up to test this and found exactly that. Do nothing more 
dramatic than pick a rat up an d handle it fifteen minutes a day for the first few weeks of its life, put it back in its cage 
with the unhandled controls, come back two years later... and the handled rat is  spared the entire feed forward cascade 
of hippocampal damage, memory loss, and elevated glucocorticoid levels.Page 197 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmReal rats in the real world don't get handled by graduate students. Is there a natural wo rld equivalent of "neonatal 
handling" in the laboratory? Meaney went on to show th at rat mothers who spend more  time licking and grooming 
their pups in those critical first few weeks induce the same handling phenomenon. It seems particularly pleasing that 
this grim cascade of stress-rel ated degeneration in old age can be derailed  by subtle mothering y ears earlier. No doubt 
there are other genetic and expe riential factors that bias a rat toward successful or unsucce ssful aging, a subject that 
Meaney still pursues. Of greatest importance for our purposes  now, however, is simply that this degeneration is not 
inevitable.
If the fates of inbred laboratory rats are this variable, how humans fare is likely to be even more diverse. Which 
humans age successfully? To review some of the material in chapter 12, plain ol d aging itself is more successful than 
many would guess. Levels of self-assessed contentment do not decline with age. While social networks decrease in 
size, they don't decline in quality. In  the United States, the av erage eighty-five-year-old spends little time in an 
institution (a year and a half for women; half a year for men). The average person in th at age range, taking three to 
eight medications a day, nevertheless ty pically categorizes herself as healthy. And another very good thing: despite 
the inherent mathematical impossibility, the average aged pers on considers herself to be healthier and better off than 
the average aged person.
Amid that good news, who are the people who age particularly  successfully? As we saw in th e last chapter, one factor 
is making sure you pick parents who were not poor. But there are other factors as well. The psychiatrist George 
Vaillant has been looking at this for years, beginning with his famous Harvard aging study. In 1941, a Harvard dean 
picked out a couple of hundred undergraduates (all male back then, naturally), who would be studied for the rest of 
their lives. For starters, at age sixty-fi ve, these men had half the mortality rate  of the rest of their Harvard peers, 
already a successfully aging crowd. Who we re the students picked by that dean? Students whom he considered to be 
"sound." Oh hell, you're thinking—I'm a fifty-year-old woman tr ying to figure out how to  age successfully and the 
prescription is to act in a way so that a 1940s Boston Brahmin with a pipe and tw eed jacket would consider me to be a 
sound twenty-year-old fellow?
Fortunately, Vaillant's research gives us more to work with than that. Among this population, which subset has had 
the greatest health, contentment,  and longevity in old age? A su bset with an array of traits , apparent before age fifty: 
no smoking, minimal alcohol use, lots of exercise, normal body weight, absence of depression, a warm, stable 
marriage, and a mature, resilient coping  style (which seems built around extrov ersion, social conn ectiveness, and low 
neuroticism). Of course, none of this tells you where someone gets the capacity for a mature resilient coping style, or 
the social means to have a stable marr iage. Nor does it control for the possibility that men who, for example, have 
been drinking excessively have done so because they've had to deal with more than their share of miserable stressors. 
Despite those confounds, findings like these have emerge d from other studies, and with more representative 
populations than Harvard graduates.
Joseph Greenstein, "The Mighty Atom," in old age. An idol of my youth, Greenstein was still performing his feats of 
strength in Madison Square Garden as an octogenarian. He attributed it to clean, vegetarian living.
Another literature shows the tremendous ge rontological benefits of being respect ed and needed in old age. This has 
been shown in many settings, but is best appreciated with our society's equivalents of village elders—the dramatically 
successful aging of Supreme Court justic es and conductors. It certainly fits with everything we learned about in 
chapter 13—you're eighty-five, and you get to influence your nation's laws for a century to come, or spend your days Page 198 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmaerobically exercising by waving your baton about and determining whether a whole orchestra full of adults gets a 
potty break before or after another run through Wagner's Ring Cycle.*
The study of successful aging is a young field, and some mammoth longitudinal studies are under way that will 
produce a treasure trove of data , not only about what  traits predict successful aging, but where those traits come from. 
In the meantime, though, the point for this chapter is to see that there are lots of fo lks out there who successfully 
navigate one of the most stressful passages of life.
* The issue of respect may help explain th e highly publicized finding that winning an  Oscar at any point in your life extends y our life expectancy 
about four years, rela tive to actors who were nominated but didn't win.
Coping with Catastrophic Illness
In the early 1960s, when scientists were just beginning to  investigate whether psychological stress triggers the same 
hormonal changes that physical stressors do, a group of psychiatrists conducted what has become a classic study. It 
concerned the parents of children dying of  cancer and the high glucocorticoid leve ls that those pare nts secreted. There 
was great variance in this measure—some of the parents secreted immense quantities of glucocorticoids; others were 
in the normal range. The investigators, in in-depth psychi atric interviews, explored which parents were holding up 
best to this horrible stressor, and identified a number of coping styles associated with lower glucocorticoid levels.
One important variable was the ability of  parents to displace a major worry onto something less threatening. A father 
has been standing vigil by his sick child for weeks. It's clear to ev eryone that he needs to get away for a few days, to 
gain some distance, as he is near a br eaking point. Plans are made for him to l eave, and just before he does, he is 
feeling great anxiety. Why? At  one extreme is the parent who says, "I've seen how rapidly medical crises can develop 
at this stage. What if my daughter suddenly gets very sick  and dies while I am away? Wh at if she dies without me?" 
At the other extreme is the parent w ho can repackage the anxiety into someth ing more manageable—"Well, I'm just 
worried that she'll be lonely without me, that the nurses wo n't have time to read her favorite stories." The latter style 
was associated with lower glucocorticoid levels.
A second variable had to do with denial. When a child went into remission, which frequently happened, did the parent 
look at him and say to the doctor, "It's ov er with, there's nothing to worry about, we don't even want to hear the word 
'remission,' he's going to be fine"? Or did she peer anxiou sly at the child, wondering if every cough, every pain, every 
instant of fatigue was a sign that the disease had returned? During periods of remission, parents who denied that 
relapse and death were likely and instead focused on the seemingly healthy moment had lower glucocorticoid levels 
(as we will see shortly, this facet of the study had a very different postscript).
A final variable was whether the parent had a structure of  religious rationalization to explain the illness. At one 
extreme was the parent who, while obviously profoundly distressed by her child's cancer, was deeply religious and 
perceived the cancer to be God's test of her family. She ev en reported something resemb ling an increase in her self-
esteem: "God does not choose just anyo ne for a task like this; He chose
us because He knew we were special an d could handle this." At the other extr eme was the parent who said, in effect, 
"Don't tell me that God works in mysterious ways. In fact, I don't want to hear about God." The researchers found that 
if you can look at your  child having cancer and decide th at God is choosing you for this  special task, you are likely to 
have less of a stress-response (the larger issue of re ligious belief and health w ill be considered shortly).
Differences in Vulnerability to Learned Helplessness
In chapter 14,1 described the learned helplessness mode l and its relevance to depression. I emphasized how 
generalized the model appears to be: anim als of many different species show some version of giving up on life in the 
face of something aversive and out of their control.
Yet when you look at research papers  about learned helplessness, there is the usual—bar graphs with T-shaped 
variance bars indicating large differences in response. For example, of the laboratory dogs put through one learned 
helplessness paradigm, about one-third wind up being resistan t to the phenomenon. This is  the same idea as the one 
out of ten hostages who comes out of captivity a mentally healthier person th an when he went in. Some folks and 
some animals are much more resist ant to learned helplessness than average. Who are the lucky ones?
Why are some dogs relatively resistant to learned helplessness? An important clue: dogs born and raised in 
laboratories, bred only for research pur poses, are more likely to succumb to learned helplessness than those who have 
come to the lab by way of the pound. Martin Seligman offers this explanation: if a dog has been out in the real world, 
experiencing life and fending for itself (as the dogs who wind up in a pound are likely to have done), it has learned 
about how many controllable things ther e are in life. When the experience with  an uncontrollable stressor occurs, the 
dog, in effect, is more likely to conclude that "this is aw ful, but it isn't the entire world." It resists globalizing the 
stressor into learned helplessn ess. In a similar vein, humans with more of an internalized locus of control—the Page 199 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmperception that they are the masters of their own destiny—are more resistant in experimental models of learned 
helplessness.
More Stress Management  Lessons from the Baboons
Chapters 15 and 17 introduced social pr imates, and some critical variables that shaped social  success for them: 
dominance rank, the society in wh ich rank occurs, the personal experience of both, and perhaps
most important, the role played by pers onality. In their Machiave llian world, we sa w there is more to social success 
and health for a male than just a lot of muscle or some big sharp canines. Just as impo rtant are social and political 
skills, the ability to build coalitions, and the ability to walk  away from provocations. The personality traits associated 
with low glucocorticoid levels certainly made sense in th e context of effective handling of psychological stressors—
the abilities to differentiate threatening from neutral inter actions with rivals, to exert some control over social 
conflicts, to differentiate good news fr om bad, to displace frustration. And, ab ove all else, the ability to make social 
connections—grooming, being groomed, playing with infants. So how do these variables pl ay out over time, as these 
animals age?
Baboons are long-lived animals, sticking around the savanna for anywhere from fifteen to  twenty-five years. Which 
means you don't get to follow an animal  from its first awkward bloom of puberty into old age very readily. Twenty-
five years into this project, I'm just beginning to get a se nse of the life histories of so me of these animals, and the 
development of their in dividual differences.
As a first finding, males with the "low glucocorticoid" pers onalities were likely to remain in the high-ranking cohort 
significantly longer than ra nk-matched males with high glucocorticoid profiles. About three times longer. Among 
other things, that probably means that the low-glucocorticoid guys are outreproducing the other team. From the 
standpoint of evoluti on—passing on copies of your genes, all that jazz—th is is a big difference. It  suggests that if you 
were to go away for a couple of zillion mill ennia, allow that differenti al selection to play out, and then return to finish 
your doctoral dissertation, your average baboon would be a descendent of these low-glucocorticoid guys, and the 
baboon social world would involve a lot of impulse control and gratification postponement. Maybe even toilet 
training.
And what about the old ages of these individual baboons th at are alive today? The most dramatic difference I've 
uncovered concerns the variable of social affiliation. Your average male baboon has a pretty lousy old age, once he's 
gotten a paunch and some worn canines and dropped down to th e cellar of the hierarchy. Lo ok at the typical pattern of 
dominance interactions among the males. Usually, Number 3 in the hierarchy is having most of his interactions with 
Numbers 2 and 4, while Number 15 is mo stly concerned with 14 and 16 (excep t, of course, when 3 is having a bad 
day and needs to displace aggression on  someone way down). Most interactions  then usually occur between animals 
of adjacent ranks. However, amid that pattern, you'll note th at the top-ranking ha lf-dozen or so animals, nevertheless, 
are spending a
lot of time subjecting poor Number 17 to a lot of humiliating  dominance displays, displacing him from whatever he is 
eating, making him get up whenever he settles into a nice shady spot, just generally giving him a hard time. What's 
that about? Number 17 turns out to have been very high-ranking back when the current dominant animals were 
terrified adolescents. They remember, and can't believe they can make this decrep it ex-king grovel anytime they feel 
like it.
So as he ages, your average male baboon gets a lot of grief from the current generation of thugs, and this often leads 
to a particularly painful way of passing your golden years—the treatment gets so bad that the male picks up and 
transfers to a different troop. That's a stressful, hazardous journey,  with an extremely high mortality rate for even a 
prime-aged animal—moving across novel terr ain, chancing predators on your own. All that to wind up in a new troop, 
subject to an extreme version of that to o-frequently-true truism about primate ol d age; namely, aging is a time of life 
spent among strangers. Clearly for a baboon in that position,  being low-ranking, aged, and ignored among strangers is 
better than being low-ranking, aged, and remembered by a vengeful generation.
But what about males who, in their prime, had a low-glucoc orticoid personality, spending lots of time affiliated with 
females, grooming, sitting in contact, playing with kids? They  just keep doing the same thing. They get hassled by the 
current rulers, but it doesn't seem to count as much as th e social connectedness to these baboons. They don't transfer 
troops, and continue the same pattern of grooming and socializ ation for the rest of their liv es. That seems like a pretty 
good definition of successful aging for any primate.
APPLYING PRINCIPLES OF DEALING WITH PSYC HOLOGICAL STRESS: SO ME SUCCESS STORIES
Parents somehow shouldering the burden of their child's fa tal illness, a low-ranking baboon who has a network of 
friends, a dog resisting learned helplessn ess—these are striking examples of in dividuals who, faced with a less than 
ideal situation, nevertheless excel at co ping. That's great, but what if you don't already happen to be that sort of Page 200 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmindividual? When it comes to rats that wish to age successfully, the useful bit of  advice a previous section generates is 
to make sure you pick the right sort of infancy. When it comes to humans who wish to cope with stress and achieve 
successful aging, you should be sure to
pick the right parents' genes, and the right parents' soci oeconomic status as well. The other cases of successfully 
coping with stress may not be any more encouraging to the rest of us. What if we happen not to be the sort of baboon 
who looks at the bright side, the person who holds on to hope when others become hopeless, the parent of the child 
with cancer who somehow psychologically manages the unm anageable? There are many st ories of individuals who 
have supreme gifts of coping. For us u ngifted ones, are there ways to change the world around us and to alter our 
perceptions of it so that psychological st ress becomes at least a bit less stressful?
The rest of the chapter is devoted to ways in which to cha nge our coping styles. But a fi rst thing to emphasize is that 
we can change the way we cope, both physiologically and psychologically. As the most obvious example, physical 
conditioning brought about by regular exercise will lower bl ood pressure and resting heart rate and increase lung 
capacity, just to mention a few of its effects. Among Type-A people, psychoth erapy can change not only behaviors 
but also cholesterol profiles, risk of heart attack, and risk of dying, independent of changes in diet or other 
physiological regulators of cholesterol. As another example, the pain and stressfulness of childbirth can be modulated 
by relaxation techniques such as Lamaze.*
Sheer repetition of certain act ivities can change the connection between your behavior and activation of your stress-
response. In one classic stu dy discussed earlier, Norwegian soldiers learning to parach ute were examined over the 
course of months of training. At the time of their first jump, they were all terrif ied; they felt like vats of Jell-O, and 
their bodies reflected it. Glucocorticoids  and epinephrine levels were elevated, testosterone levels were suppressed—
all for hours before and after the jump. As they repeated the experience, master ed it, stopped being terrified, their 
hormone secretion patterns changed. By the end of training they were no longer turning on their stress-response hours 
before and after the jump, only at the actual time. They were  able to confine their stress -response to an appropriate 
moment, when there was a physical stre ssor; the entire psychological component of the stress-response had been 
habituated away.
All of these examples show that the wo rkings of the stress-response can change over time. We grow, learn, adapt, get 
bored, develop an
* Well, I'm not so sure about that one. I' ve now watched my wife go through two deliver ies, and Lamaze worked  wonders for, like , 
three minutes, after which it didn't do s quat, other than occupy me with point lessly reviewing La maze class notes.
interest, drift apart, mature, harden, fo rget. We are malleable beasts. What are the buttons we can use to manipulate 
the system in a way that will benefit us?
The issues raised in the chapter on the psychology of st ress are obviously critical: control, predictability, social 
support, outlets for frustrati on. Seligman and colleagues, for example, ha ve reported some laboratory success in 
buffering people from learned helplessness when confront ed with an unsolvable task—if subjects are first given 
"empowering" exercises (various tasks that  they can readily master and control). Bu t this is a fairly artificial setting. 
Some classic studies have manipulated similar psychological variables in the real world, even some of the grimmest 
parts of the real world. Here are two examples with startling results.
SELF-MEDICATION AND
CHRONIC PAIN SYNDROMES
Whenever something painful happens to me, amid all the di stress I am surprised at being reminded of how painful 
pain is. That thought is always followed by another, "What if  I hurt like this all the tim e?" Chronic pain syndromes are 
extraordinarily debilitating. Diabetic neuropathies, crushed sp inal nerve roots, severe burn s, recovery after surgery can 
all be immensely painful. This poses a medical problem, insofar as it is often difficult to give enough drugs to control the pain without causing addiction or putting the person in da nger of an overdose. As any nurse will attest, this also 
poses a management problem, as the chronic pain patient spen ds half the day hitting the call button, wanting to know 
when his next painkiller is coming, and the nurse has to spend half the day explaining that it is not yet time. A 
memory that will always make me shudder: at one point, my father was hospitalized for something. In the room next 
door was an elderly man who, seemingly around the clock, every thirty seconds, would plaintively shout in a heavy 
Yiddish accent, "Nurse. Nurse!  It hurts. It hurts! Nurse!" The first day it was horrifying. The second day it was 
irritating. By the third day, it had all the impact of the rhythmic chirping of crickets.
Awhile back some researchers got an utterly mad idea, the thought of frothing lunatics. Why not give the painkillers 
to the patients and let them decide wh en they need medication? You can just  imagine the apoplexy that mainstream 
medicine had over that one—patients will overdose, become addicts, you can't let patients do that. It was triedPage 201 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmwith cancer patients and postsurgical pa tients, and it turned out that the patients did just fine when they self-
medicated. In fact, the total am ount of painkillers consumed decreased.
Why should consumptio n go down? Because when you are ly ing there in bed, in pain, un certain of the time, uncertain 
if the nurse has heard your call or will have time to respond, uncertain of everything, you are asking for painkillers not 
only to stop the pain but also to stop the uncertainty. Reinstitute control and predictability, give the patient the 
knowledge that the medication is there fo r the instant that the pain becomes too severe, and the pain often becomes far 
more manageable.
INCREASING CONTROL IN NURSING HOMES
I can imagine few settings that better re veal the nature of psychological stress than a nursing home. Under the best of 
circumstances, the elderly tend to have a less active, less a ssertive coping style than young people. When confronted 
by stressors, the latter are more likely to try to confront  and solve the problem, while the former are more likely to 
distance themselves from the stressor or  adjust their attitude toward it. Th e nursing home setting worsens these 
tendencies toward withdrawal and passivity: it's a world in  which you are often isolated  from the social support 
network of a lifetime and in which you have little control over your daily activities, your finances, often your own 
body. A world of few outlets for frustration, in which you are often treated like a child— "infantilized." Your easiest 
prediction is "life will get worse."
A number of psychologists have ventured into this world to try to apply some of the ideas about control and self-
efficacy outlined in chapter 13. In one study, for example, resident s of a nursing home were given more responsibility 
for everyday decision making. They were made responsible for choosing their meals for the next day, signing up in 
advance for social activities, picking out  and caring for a plant for their room, instead of ha ving one placed there and 
cared for by the nurses ("Oh, here, I'll water that, dear; why don't you just get back into bed?"). People became more 
active—initiating more social interactions—and described themselves in questionnaire s as happier. Their health 
improved, as rated by doctors unaware of whether they were in the increased-responsibility group or the control 
group. Most remarkable of all, the death rate in  the former group was half that of the latter.
In other studies, different variables of control were manipulated. Almost unanimously, these studies show that a 
moderate increase in control produces all the salutary effects just described; in  a few studies, physiological measures 
were even taken, showing changes like reductions in gluc ocorticoid levels or improved immune function. The forms 
that increased control could take were many. In one study, the baseline group was left alone, while the experimental 
group was organized into a residents' council that made decisions about life in the nursing home. In the latter group, 
health improved and individuals showed more voluntary particip ation in social activities. In another study, residents in 
a nursing home were bei ng involuntarily moved to a different reside nce because of the financial collapse of the first 
institution. The baseline group was moved in the normal manner, while the experimental group was given extensive 
lectures on the new home and given control of a wide variety of issues connected with the move (the day of the move, 
the decor of the room they would liv e in, and so on). When the move o ccurred, there were far fewer medical 
complications for the latter group. The infantilizing effects of loss of control were shown explicitly in another study in 
which residents were given a variety of tasks to do. When the staff present encouraged them, performance improved; 
when the staff present helped them, performance declined.
Another example of these principles: this study concerned visits by college students to people in nursing homes. One 
nursing-home group, the baseline group, received no student  visitors. In a second group, students would arrive at 
unpredictable times to chat. There were va rious improvements in functioning and health in this group, testifying to the 
positive effects of increased social contact. In the th ird and fourth groups, control and predictability were 
introduced—in the third group, the residents could decide wh en the visit occurred, whereas  in the fourth they could 
not control it, but at least were told when the visit would take place. Functioni ng and health improved even more in 
both of those groups, compared with the second. Control an d predictability help, even in settings where you think it 
won't make a dent in someone's unhappiness.
STRESS MANAGEMENT:
READING THE LABEL CAREEULLY
These studies generate some simple answ ers to coping with stress that are far from simple to implement in everyday 
life. They emphasize the importance of manipulating feelings of control, predictability, outlets
for frustration, social connect edness, and the perception of whether things are worsening or improv ing. In effect, the 
nursing home and pain studies are encouraging dispatches fr om the front lines in this war of coping. Their simple, 
empowering, liberating message: if manipulating such psychological variables can work in these trying circumstances, 
it certainly should for the more trivial psychological stressors that fill our daily lives.Page 202 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThis is the message that fills stress management semina rs, therapy sessions, and the many books on the topic. 
Uniformly, they emphasi ze finding means to gain at least some degree of control in difficult situations, viewing bad 
situations as discrete events rather than permanent or pervasiv e ones, finding appropriate outlets for frustration and 
means of social support an d solace in difficult times.
That's great. But it is vital to realize that the story is not th at simple. It is critical that  one not walk away with the 
conclusion that in order to manage and minimize psychological stressors, the solution is always to have more of a 
sense of control, more predictability, more outlets, more social affiliation. These prin ciples of stress management 
work only in certain circumstances. And only for certain types of people with certain types of problems.
I was reminded of this awhile back. Thanks to this book's having transformed me from being a supposed expert about 
rats' neurons to being a supposed one about human stress, I was talking to a magazine writer about the subject. She 
wrote for a women's magazine, the type with articles about how to maintain that full satisfying sex life while being the 
CEO of a Fortune 500 company. We were talking about stress and stress management, and I was giving an outline of 
some of the ideas in the chapter on ps ychological stress. All was going well, and toward the end, the writer asked me a 
personal question to include in the arti cle—what are my outlets for dealing with stress. I made the mistake of 
answering honestly—I love my work, I try to exercise daily, and I have a fabulous marriage. Suddenly, this hard-
nosed New York writer blew up at me—"I can't write about your wonderful marriage! Don't tell me about your 
wonderful marriage! Do you know who my  readers are? They're forty-five-year-old  professionals who are unlikely to 
ever get married and want to be told how great that is!" It st ruck me that she was, perhaps,  in this category as well. It 
also struck me, as I slunk back to my rats and test tubes afterward, what an idiot I had been. You don't counsel war 
refugees to watch out about too much cholesterol or saturate d fats in their diet. You don't tell an overwhelmed single 
mother living in some inner-city hellhole about the stress-reducing effects of a daily hobby And you sure don't tell the
readership of a magazine like this how swell it is to have a soul mate for life. "More control, more predictability, more 
outlets, more social support" is not some sort of mantra to be handed out indiscriminately, along with a smile button.
This lesson is taught with enormous power by two studies th at we have already heard about, which seem superficially 
to be success stories in stress management but turned out not to be. Back to the parents of children with cancer who 
were in remission. Eventually, all the children came out of remission and di ed. When that occurred, how did the 
parents fare? There were those who all along had accepted the possibility, even probability, of a re lapse, and there 
were those who staunchly denied the possibility. As noted, dur ing the period of remission the latter parents tended to 
be the low glucocorticoid secretors. Bu t when their illusions were shattered and the disease returned, they had the 
largest increases in gluc ocorticoid concentrations.
An equally poignant vers ion of this unfortunate endi ng comes from a nu rsing home study. Recall the one in which 
residents were visited once a week by students—either un announced, at an appointed time predetermined by the 
student, or at a time of the resident's choice. As noted, the sociality did everyon e some good, but the people in the last 
two groups, with the increased predicta bility and control, did even better. Wonderful, end of study, celebration, 
everyone delighted with the clear-cut and positive results, papers to be published, lectures to be given. Student 
participants visit the people in the nursing home for a last time, offer an awkward, "You know that the study is over 
now, I, er, won't be coming back agai n, but, um, it's been great getting to know you." What happens then? Do the 
people whose functioning, happiness, and health improved now decline back to pre-experiment levels? No. They drop 
even further, winding up worse than before the study.
This makes perfect sense. Think of how it is to get twenty-five shocks an hour when yesterday you got ten. Think of 
what it feels like to have your child come out of remission after you spent the last year denying the possibility that it 
could ever happen. And think about those nursing home residents: it is one thing to be in a nursing home, lonely, 
isolated, visited once a month by your bored children. It is ev en worse to be in that situ ation and, having had a chance 
to spend time with bright, eager young people who seemed intere sted in you, to find now th ey aren't coming anymore. 
All but the most heroically  strong among us would slip anot her step lower in the face of this  loss. It is true that hope, 
no matter how irrational, can sustain us in the darkest of times. But nothing can break us more effectively than hope 
given
and then taken away capriciously. Manipulating these psychological variables is a powerful but double-edged sword.
When do these principles of in jecting a sense of control, of  predictability, of outlets, of  sociality, work  and when are 
they disastrous to apply? There are so me rules. Let's look at some specific stress management approaches and when 
they work, keeping those rules in mind.
EXERCISE
I start with exercise because this is the stress reduction approach I rely on frequently , and I'm deeply hoping that 
putting it first will mean that I'll live to be very old and healthy.Page 203 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmExercise is great to counter stress for a number of reasons. First, it decreases your risk of various metabolic and 
cardiovascular diseases, and therefor e decreases the opportunity for st ress to worsen those diseases.
Next, exercise generally makes you feel good. There's a confound in this, in that most people who do a lot of exercise, 
particularly in the form of competitive athletics, have unneurotic, extroverted, optimistic personalities to begin with 
(marathon runners are exceptions to this). However, do a pr operly controlled study, even with neurotic introverts, and 
exercise improves mood. This probably has something to do with exercise causing the secretion of beta-endorphin. In 
addition, there's the sense of self-effi cacy and achievement, that g ood stuff you try to recall when your thigh muscles 
are killing you in the middle of the aerobics class. And most of all, the stress-response is about preparing your body 
for a sudden explosion of muscular activity. You reduce tension if you actually turn on the stress-response for that 
purpose, instead of merely stewing in the middle of some time-wasting meeting.
Finally, there's some evidence that ex ercise makes for a smaller stress-respo nse to various psychological stressors.
That's great. Now for some qualifiers:
■ Exercise enhances mood and blunts the stress-response on ly for a few hours to a day after the exercise session.
■ Exercise is stress reducing so long as it is something you actually want to do. Let rats voluntarily run in a running 
wheel and their health improv es in all sorts of ways. Force them to, even whil e playing great dance music, and their 
health worsens.
■  The studies are quite clear th at aerobic exercise is better than anaerobic exercise for hea lth (aerobic exercise is the 
sustained type that, while you're doing it, doesn't leave you so out of breath that you can't talk).
■  Exercise needs to occur on a regular basis and for a sustained period. While whole careers are consumed figuring 
out exactly what schedule of aerobic exer cise works best (how often, for how long) , it's pretty clear that you need to 
exercise a minimum of twenty or thirty minutes at a time, a few times a week, to really get the health benefits.
■  Don't overdo it. Remember the lessons of chapter 7—too much can be at least as bad as too little.
MEDITATION
When done on a regular, sustained basis (that is to say, some thing close to daily, for fifteen, thirty minutes at a time), 
meditation seems to be pretty good for your health, decreas ing glucocorticoid levels, sympathetic tone, and all the bad 
stuff that too much of eith er can cause. Now the caveats:
First, the studies are clear in showing physiological benefits while someone is meditating. It's less clear that those 
good effects (for example, lowering blood pressure) persist for long afterward.
Next, when the good effects of meditation do persist, there may be a subject bias going. Suppose you want to study 
the effects of meditation on blo od pressure. What do you do? You randomly assign some people to the control group, 
making sure they never meditate, and some to the group that  now meditate an hour a day. But in most studies, there 
isn't random assignment. In other words, you study blood pressure in people who have already chosen to be regular 
meditators, and compare them to non-meditators. It's not random who chooses to meditate—maybe the physiological 
traits were there before they started meditating. Maybe thos e traits even had something to  do with their choosing to 
meditate. Some good studies have avoided this confound, but most have not.
Finally, there are lots of different type s of meditation. Don't trust anyone who says that their special brand has been 
proven scientifically to be better for your h ealth than the other flavors. Watch your wallet.
GET MORE CONTROL, MORE PREDICTABILI TY IN YOUR LIFE . . . MAYBE
More predictive information about impending stressors can be very stress-reducing. But not always. As noted in 
chapter 13, it does little good to ge t predictive information about common events (because th ese are basically 
inevitable) or ones we know to be rare  (because you weren't anxious about them in  the first place). It does little good 
to get predictive information a few s econds before something bad happens (becau se there isn't time to derive the 
psychological advantages of being able to relax a bit) or way in ad vance of the event (because who's worrying 
anyway?).
In some situations, predictive information can even make things worse—for example, wh en the information tells you 
little. This turfs us back to our post-9/11 world of "Go about your normal business but be extra careful"—Orange 
Alerts.Page 204 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmAn overabundance of information can be stressful as well.  One of the places I dreaded most in graduate school was 
the "new journal desk" in th e library, where all the scie nce journals received the prev ious week were displayed, 
thousands of pages of them. Everyone would circle around it, teetering on the edge of panic attacks. All that available 
information seemed to taunt us with how out of control we  felt—stupid, left behind, out of touch, and overwhelmed.
Manipulating a sense of control is playing with the variable in psychological stress that is most likely to be double-
edged. Too much of a sense of control can be crippli ng, whether the sense is accurate or not. An example:
When he was a medical student, a friend embarked on his surgery rotation. That first day, nervous, with no idea what 
to expect, he went to his assigned operating room and stood  at the back of a crowd of  doctors and nurses doing a 
kidney transplant. Hours into it, the chief surgeon suddenly turned to him: "Ah, you're the new medical student; good, 
come here, grab this retractor, hold it right here, steady, good boy." Surgery continued; my friend was ignored as he 
precariously maintained the un comfortable position the surgeon had put him in, leaning forward at  an angle, one arm 
thrust amid the crowd, holding the instrument, unable to see what was going on. Hours passed. He grew woozy, faint 
from the tension of holding still. He found himself teet ering, eyes beginning to cl ose—when the surgeon loomed 
before him. "Don't move a muscle because you're going to screw up EVERYTHING!" Galvanized, pani cked, half-ill, 
he barely held on ... only to discover that the "you're going to screw up everything"
scenario was a stupid hazing trick don e to every new med student. He had b een holding an inst rument over some 
irrelevant part of the body the entire time, fooled into feeling utterly responsible for the survival of the patient. (P.S.: 
He chose another medical specialty.)
As another example, recall the discussion  in chapter 8 on how tenuous a link ther e is between stress  and cancer. It is 
clearly a travesty to lead cancer patients or their famili es to believe, misinterpreting the power of the few positive 
studies in this field, that there is more possibility for control over the causes and courses of cancers than actually 
exists. Doing so is simply teaching the victims of cancer and their families that the disease is their own fault, which is 
neither true nor conducive to reducing stress in an already stressful situation.
So control is not always a good thing psychologically, and a principle of good stress management cannot be simply to 
increase the perceived amount of control in one's life. It depe nds on what that perception im plies, as we saw in chapter 
13. Is it stress-reducing to feel a sense of control when something bad happens? If you think, "Whew, that was bad, 
but imagine how much worse it would have been if I hadn't been in charge," a sense of control is clearly working to 
buffer you from feeling more stressed. However, if you thin k, "What a disaster and it's all my fault, I should have 
prevented it," a sense of control is working to your detriment. This dichotomy can be roughly translated into the 
following rule for when something stressful occurs: the more disastrous a stressor is, the worse it is to believe you had 
some control over the outcom e, because you are inevitably led to think about how much  better things would have 
turned out if only you had done something more. A sense of control works best for milder stressors. (Remember, this 
advice concerns the sense of control you perceive yourself as having, as opposed to how much control you actually 
have.)
Having an illusory sense of control in a bad setting can be so  pathogenic that one version of  it gets a special name in 
the health psychology literature. It could have been included in chapter 15, but I saved it until now. As described by 
Sherman James of Duke University, it is called John Henr yism. The name refers to th e American folk hero who, 
hammering a six-foot-long stee l drill, tried to outrace a st eam drill tunne ling through a mountain.  John Henry beat the 
machine, only to fall dead from the su perhuman effort. As James defines it, John Henryism involves the belief that 
any and all demands can be vanquished, so long as you wo rk hard enough. On questionnaires, John Henry individuals 
strongly agree with stat ements such as "When things don't go the wa y I want them, it just makes me work even 
harder," or "Once I make up my mind to do something, I stay with it until the job is com-
pletely done." This is the epitome of individuals with an internal locus of control—they  believe that, with enough 
effort and determination, they  can regulate all outcomes.
What's so wrong with that? Nothing, if you have the good fortune to live in the privileged, meritocratic world in 
which one's efforts truly do have something to do with the rewards one gets, and in a comf ortable, middle-class world, 
an internal locus of control does wonders . For example, always attr ibuting events in life to your own efforts (an 
internal locus of control) is highly predictive of lifelong health among that population of individuals who are the 
epitome of the privileged stra tum of society—Vaillant's cohort of Harvard graduates. However, in a world of people 
born into poverty, of limited educational or occupational oppor tunities, of prejudice and raci sm, it can be a disaster to 
be a John Henry, to decide that those insurmountable odds could have been surmounted, if only, if only, you worked 
even harder—John Hen-ryism is associated wi th a marked risk of hypertension a nd cardiovascular disease. Strikingly, 
James's pioneering work has shown that the dangers of John Henryism occur predominantly among the very people 
who most resemble the mythic John Henry himself, worki ng-class African Americans—a pe rsonality type that leads 
you to believe you can control the aversively uncontrollable.Page 205 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThere's an old parable about the differen ce between heaven and hell. Heaven, we are told, consists of spending all of 
eternity in the study of the holy books. In contrast, hell consists of spending all of eternity in the study of the holy 
books. To a certain extent, our perceptions and interpretati ons of events can determine whether the same external 
circumstances constitute heaven or hell, and the second half of this book has explored the means to convert the latter 
to the former. But the key is, "to a certain extent." The realm of stress management is mostly about techniques to help 
deal with challeng es that are less than disastrous. It is pretty effective in that sphere. But it just won't work to generate 
a cult of subjectivity in which these t echniques are blithely offered as a solution to the hell of a homeless street 
person, a refugee, someone prej udged to be one of society's Untouchables, or a terminal cancer patient. Occasionally, 
there is the person in a situation like that with coping powers to make one gasp in wonder, who does indeed benefit 
from these techniques. Celebrate them, but that's never grounds for turning to the person next to them in the same boat 
and offering that as a feel-good incentiv e just to get with the program. Bad sc ience, bad clinical practice, and, 
ultimately, bad ethics. If any hell really  could be converted into a heaven, th en you could make the world a better 
place merely by rousing you rself from your lounge
chair to inform a victim of some horror whose fault it is if they are
unhappy.
SOCIAL SUPPORT
This far into this book, this one should be a no brainer—so cial support makes stressors le ss stressful, so go get some. 
Unfortunately, it's not so simple.
To begin, social affiliation is not always the solution to stressful psychological turmoil. We can easily think of people 
who would be the last ones on earth we would want to be stuck with when we are troubled. We can easily think of 
troubled circumstance s where being with anyone would make us feel worse. Physiological studies have demonstrated 
this as well. Take a rodent or a primate that has been housed alone and put it into  a social group. Th e typical result is a 
massive stress-response. In the case of monkeys, this can go on for weeks or months while they tensely go about 
figuring out who dominates whom in the group's social hierarchy*
In another demonstration of this principle, infant monkeys were separated from their mothers. Predictably, they had 
pretty sizable stress-responses, with elev ations in glucocorticoid levels. The elev ation could be prevented if the infant 
was placed in a group of monkeys— but on ly if the infant already knew those anim als. There is little to be derived in 
the way of comfort from strangers.
Even once animals are no longer strangers,  on average half of those in any gr oup will be socially dominant to any 
given individual, and havi ng more dominant an imals around is not necessa rily a comfort during tr ouble. Even intimate 
social affiliation is not always helpful. We saw in psychoim munity chapter 8 that being ma rried is associated with all 
sorts of better health outcomes. Some of it is due to the ol d reverse causality trick—unheal thy people are less likely to 
get married. Some is due to the fact that marriage often increases the material well-being of people and gives you 
someone to remind and cajole you
* Some time back, the U.S. government proposed new guidelines to  improve the psychological well-be ing of primates used for rese arch; one well-
intentioned but uninformed feature was that monkeys housed indi vidually during a study should, at least once a week, spend time  in a group of 
other monkeys. That precise social situatio n had been studied for years as a model of  chronic social stress, and it was clear t hat the regulations 
would do nothing but increase the psychological well-being of thes e animals. Fortunately, the proposed rules were changed after  some expert 
testimony.
into cutting back on some lifestyle risk factors. After cont rolling for those factors, marriage , on average, is associated 
with improved health. But that  chapter also noted an obvious but important  exception to this general rule: for women, 
being in a bad marriage is associated with immune suppression. So  a close, intimate relationship with the wrong 
person can be anything but stress-reducing.
Expanding outward, it is also healthful to have a strong networ k of friends and, as we saw in the last chapter, to be in 
a community teeming with social  capital. What's the potential downside of th at? Something I alluded to. Amid all that 
nice, Utopian social capital business lurk s the inconvenient fact th at a tightly cohesive, cooperative community with 
shared values may be all about homogeneity, conformity, and xenophobia. Maybe even brownshirts and jackboots. So 
social capital isn't always warm and fuzzy.
Throughout this section I have been emphasizing getting social support from the right person, the right network of 
friends, the right community. Often, one of the strongest stress-reducing qualities of social support is the act of giving 
social support, to be needed. The twelft h-century philosopher Maimonides construc ted a hierarchy of the best ways to 
do charitable acts, and at the top was wh en the charitable person gives anonymou sly to an anonymous recipient. That's 
a great abstract goal, but often there is  a staggering power in seeing the face that you have helped. In a world of 
stressful lack of contro l, an amazing source of control we all have is the ability to make the world a better place, one 
act at a time.Page 206 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmRELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY
The idea that religiosity or spirituality protects against di sease, particularly against stress-related disease, is 
immensely controversial. I've encountered some of the key res earchers in this fiel d, and have noticed that their read of 
the literature often coincides with their personal religious vi ews. For that reason, I think it would be helpful to put my 
cards on the table before tackling this subject. I had a highly orthodox religious upbringing and believed devoutly. 
Except that now I am an atheist, have no room in my life for spirituality of any kind, and believe that religion is 
phenomenally damaging. Except that I wish I could be religious. Except that it makes no sense to me and I'm baffled 
by people who believe. Except that  I'm also moved by them. So I' m confused. On to the science.
A huge literature shows that religious belief, religious practice, spirituality, and being prayed for can maintain good 
health—that is to say, decreases the in cidence of disease, decreases the morta lity rates caused by disease (put those 
two effects together and you have ex tended life span), and accelerates reco very from disease. So what's the 
controversy?
First, some definitional issues. What's religiosity versus sp irituality? The former is about an institutionalized system 
with a historical precedent and a lot of adherents; the latter is more pe rsonal. As pointed out by Ken Pargament of 
Bowling Green University, the former has also come to m ean formal, outward-oriented, doctrinal, authoritarian, and 
inhibiting of expression, while the latter often implies subj ective, emotional, inward-oriented, and freely expressive. 
When comparing religious people with people who define th emselves as spiritual but without a religious affiliation, 
the former tend to be older, less educ ated, and lower in socioeconomic status, with a higher percentage of men. So 
religiosity and spirituality can be very different things. Bu t despite that, the health literature says roughly similar 
things about both, so I'm going to use them interchangeably here.
What's the controversy? Amid all those studies showing health benefits, it's whether there really are any benefits. 
Why so much uncertainty? For starters, b ecause many of the studies are loony, or in volve mistakes that should have 
been sorted out in the middle school science fair. But even among the serious studies, it is very hard to carry out 
research in this area with approaches th at would count as the gold standard in the science business. For starters, most 
studies are retrospective. Moreover, people are usually assessing their own level of religiosity (including objective 
measures like how often they attend reli gious services), and folks are notoriousl y inaccurate at th is sort of recall.
Another problem is one that should easily be avoided but rarely is. This is a subtle issue of statistics, and goes 
something like this—measure a ZILLION things related to  religiosity (most of them overlapping), and measure a 
ZILLION things related to health (ditto), then see if anyt hing in the first category predicts anything in the second. 
Even if there is no relationship at all between religiosity  and health, with enough correlations, something pops up as 
significant by sh eer chance and, voila, stop the presses, you've just proved that religion makes you healthy. Finally 
and most important in this area of science, you can't randomly assign people to different study groups ("You folks 
become atheists, and you guys start deeply believing in God,  and we'll meet back here in  ten years to check everyone's 
blood pressure").
So religiosity is a tough subject to do real science on, something the best people readily point out. Consider two 
leading thinkers in this field, Richard Sloan of Columbia University and Carl Thoresen of Stanford University. I'll be 
citing them a lot because each is an en ormously rigorous scientist,  and one is a strong advocate of the health benefits 
of religiosity, while the other is as st rong a critic. Read their reviews of the subject and both devote half the space to 
savaging the, er, heck out of the literature, pointing out that the vast majority of studies in  the field are plain awful and 
should be ignored.
Once you've separated the wheat from the voluminous chaff,  what's there? Interestingly,  Sloan and Thoresen agree on 
the next point. That is, when you cons ider objective medical meas ures, like number of days of hospitalization for an 
illness, there's not a shred of evidence that praying for someone improves her health (independent of her knowing that 
she has the social support of someone rooting for her to the higher powers). This was something already concluded by 
the nineteenth-century scientist, Francis Galton, who poin ted out that despite having their health prayed for by 
overflowing churchfuls of loyal peasants each Sunday, European ro yals lived no longer than anyone else.
Another thing that folks like Sloan and Thoresen agree upon is that when you do see a legitimate link between 
religiosity and good health, you don't know which came fi rst. Being religious may make you healthy, and being 
healthy may make you religious. They also agree that when you do see a link, even one in which religiosity gives rise 
to good health , you still don't know if it has an ything to do with the religiosity. This is because being religious 
typically gets you a religious community, and thus social su pport, meaningful social roles, good role models, social 
capital, all that good stuff. And because in a large percentage of religion s, religiosity usually means fewer of those 
drinking and smoking and carousing risk factors. So those need to be controlled for.
And once you've done that, remarkably, Thoresen and Sloan ar e still mostly in agreement, which is that religiosity 
does predict good health to some ex tent in a few areas of medicine.Page 207 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThoresen has done the most detailed analys is of this, in some hard-nosed reviews of the field. He finds that regular 
attendance at religious services is reas onably predictive of a decreased mortal ity rate and of a decreased risk of 
cardiovascular disease and depression. Howe ver, he also finds that religiosity doesn't predict much of anything about 
cancer progression, cancer mortality rates, medical disability, and speed of recovery from an illness. Moreover, deeply 
religious people (by their own assessment) derive no more of what health benefits th ere are than the less deeply 
religious. His conclusion is that there's suggestive but
not definitive evidence that religiosity, in and of itself, improves health, but th e effects are pretty limited, and they're 
more about healthy people staying healthy than sick pe ople staying alive and recovering faster.
Here is where Sloan becomes a strong cr itic. He reaches pretty much the same conclusion, but is most impressed by 
how small these effects are and feels that the whole subject doesn't remotely deserve the attention it has gotten. In 
contrast, advocates respond by saying, "These aren't much smaller effects than in other, more mainstream areas of 
medicine, and they're big factors in so me subsets of people." And thus ev eryone argues back an d forth until the 
conference session is over with and it's time for all the scientists to go to lunch.
To the extent that religiosity is good for health, once you control for social support and decreased risk factors, why is 
it healthful? For lots of reasons that have everything to do with stress, and with the type of deity(ies) you believe in.
To start, you can have a deity whose rules are mysterious . This is the original Judeo-Christian Yahweh, a point 
emphasized by Thomas Cahill in his book, The Gift of the Jews. Prior to the monotheistic Yahweh, the gods made 
sense, in that they had familiar, if supra-human appeti tes—they didn't just want a lamb shank, they wanted the best 
lamb shank, wanted to seduce all the wood nymphs, and so on. But the early Jews invented a god with none of those 
desires, who was so utterly unfathomable, unknowable, as to be pants-wettingly terrifying.* So even if His actions are 
mysterious, when He intervenes you at  least get the stress-reducing advantages of attribution—it may not be clear 
what the deity is up to, but you at least know who is resp onsible for the locust swarm or  the winning lottery ticket. 
There is Purpose lurking, as an antidote to the existential void.
Next, if it is an intervening deity with discernible rule s, the deity provides the comfort of both attribution and 
predictive information— carry out ritual  X, or Y is going to happen. And thus, when things go wrong, there is an 
explanation.+ If it happens that things have really
* Tapping into this notion, the satirical newspaper The Onion (25 October 2001) once began an article as follows: "new haven, ct: In a diagnosis 
that helps explain the confusing and contradictory aspects of the cosmos that have baffled philosophers, theologians, and other  students of the 
human condition for millennia, God, creator of the universe and longtime deity to b illions of followers, was found Monday to su ffer from bipolar 
disorder."
+ When I was young, I was taught that the Ho locaust was a logical response on God's part  to the affront of German Jewry inventin g the Reform 
movement. At the time, that caused me cons iderable comfort and, once that whole edif ice had crumbled, caused immeasurable rage.
gone wrong just to you, there is the opportunity to reframe the event, in the extraordinary way achieved by some of 
the parents of children with  cancer—God has entrusted you with a burden  that he can't entrust to just anyone.
If it is a deity who does all the above, and will respond to your personal and sp ecific entreaties (especi ally if the deity 
preferentially responds to people who look/talk/eat/dress/pray like you), there is an added layer of control introduced. 
And if on top of all that, the deity is viewed as benign, the stress-reducing adva ntages must be extraordinary. If you 
can view cancer and Alzheimer's disease,  the Holocaust and ethnic cleansing, if  you can view the inevitable cessation 
of the beating of the hearts of all your loved ones, all in the context of a loving plan, that must constitute the greatest 
source of support imaginable.
Two additional areas of agreem ent: both Sloan and Thoresen are made very nervous by the idea that findings in this 
field will lead to physicians a dvising their patients to become religious. Both note that amid this very measured good 
news, religiosity can make health, mental or otherwise, a lot worse. As noted by Sharon Packer of the New School for 
Social Research, religion can be very good  at reducing stressors, but is often the inventor of those stressors in the first 
place.
PICKING THE RIGHT STRATEGY AT TH E RIGHT TIME: COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY
In the face of some stressor, "coping" can take a variety of  forms. You can problem-solve,  tackling the cognitive task 
of figuring out if it makes more sense to try to alter the stressor or alter your perception of it. Or you can focus on 
emotions—it can be stress-reducing to me rely admit that you're hurting emotionally from this stressor. You can focus 
on relationships and social support as a means of feeling less stressed.
People obviously vary as to which st yle they gravitate toward. For exampl e, an endless source of tension in 
heterosexual relationships is that women, on average, te nd toward emotion- or relati onship-based coping styles, 
whereas men tend toward pr oblem-solving approaches.*Page 208 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmBut regardless of which is your most natural coping style, a key point is that different styles tend to work better in 
different circumstances. As an idiotic example, suppose there' s a big exam looming. One version of coping with it is 
to study; another is to reframe the
* This point is made brilliantly in a book called You Just Don't Understand by the linguist Deborah Tannen; this  book should be required reading 
for newlyweds.
meaning of a bad grade ("There's more to life than this class, I'm still a good person who is good at other things ..."). 
Obviously, before the exam, the stress-reduction-by-studying strategy should dominate, while you should hold off on 
the stress-reduction-by-reframing approach  until after the exam. As a more mean ingful example, consider a major 
illness in the family, complete with a bunch of brutally difficult decisions looming, versus a death in the family. 
Typically, problem-solving approaches work better in the illness scenario; emotion- and relationship-based coping 
works better in the case of a death.
Another version of this need for switching strategies crops up in the work of Martin Seligman. Amid all the good 
press that an inner locus of control gets, we just saw fr om the John Henryism example how counterproductive it can 
be. Seligman's work has demonstrated how useful and hea lthy it is to be able to switch loci of control. When 
something good happens, you want to believe that this outcome arose from your efforts, and has broad, long-lasting 
implications for you. When the outcome is bad, you want to believe that it was due to something out of your control, 
and is just a transient event with  very local, limited implications.
Implicit in switching to the optimal strategy for the particular circumstance is having the cognitive flexibility to switch 
strategies, period. This was something emphasized by Anto novsky, one of the pioneers of SES and health research. 
For him, what was the predictor of h ealth in a person? Coping responses built around fixed rules and flexible 
strategies. This requires that we fight a reflex common to most of us. If something bad is happening and our attempts 
to cope are not working, one of our most common responses is  to, well, go back in there an d just try twice as hard to 
cope in the usual way. Although that sometimes does the trick,  that's rare. During times of stress, finding the resources 
to try something new is really hard and is often just what's needed.
WHAT WAS HE GOING ON ABOUT WITH THAT!
Here's an additional idea that doesn't even  feel half-baked yet. One of the themes of this book is the goal of contrasts. 
Physical stressor, you want to activate a stress-response; psychological stressor, you don't. Basal conditions, as little 
glucocorticoid secretion as poss ible; real stressor, as much as  possible. Onset of stress, ra pid activation; end of stress, 
rapid recovery.
Consider a schematic version of this, based on those Norweg ian soldiers learning to par achute: the first time they 
jumped, their blood pressure was through the roof at the time of the jump (Part B). But in addition it was up for hours 
before with anticipatory terror (Part A), a nd for hours after—still weak-kneed (Part C).
By the zillionth time they jumped, what was the profile lik e? The same massive stress-res ponse during the jump (Part 
B), but two seconds before and after, no thing—the parachuters are just thinking  about what they're going to have for 
lunch.
This is what "conditioning" is about. Sharpening the contrasts between on and off, between foreground and 
background. Increasing the signal-to-nois e ratio. Framed in the context of th is book, when some one has gotten a 
zillion jumps' worth of experience, th ey turn on the stress-response only during the actual stressor. As discussed 
earlier, what have been winnowed away  by that experience are parts A a nd C—the psychological stress-response.
This is great. But what I'm grasping at is an idea about a subtler goal. This thinking owes a lot to conversations with 
Manjula Waldron of Ohio State University , an engineering professor who also happe ns to be a hospital chaplain. This 
feels embarrassingly Zen-ish for me to  spout, being a short, h ypomanic guy with a Brooklyn accent, but here goes:
Maybe the goal isn't to maximi ze the contrast between a low baseline and a high level of activation. Maybe the idea is 
to have both simultaneously. Huh? Maybe the goal would be for your baseline to be something more than the mere 
absence of activation, a mere default, but to instead be an energized calm, a proactive choice. And for the ceiling to 
consist of some sort of equ ilibrium and equanimity threading through the crazed arousal. I have felt this a few times 
playing soccer, inept as I am at it, where there's a mo ment when, successful outcom e or not, ever y physiological 
system is going like mad, and my body does something that my mind didn't even dream of, and the two seconds when 
that happened seemed to take a lot long er than it should have. But this busin ess about the calm amid  the arousal isn't 
just another way of talking about "good stress" (a stimulat ing challenge, as opposed to  a threat). Even when the 
stressor is bad and your heart is racing  in crisis, the goal should be to some how make the fraction of a second between 
each heartbeat into an inst ant that expands in time and allows you to regroup.Page 209 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmThere, I have no idea what I'm talking about, but I think there might be something important lurking there. Enough 
said.
JUST DO IT: THE 80/20 QUALITY OF STRESS MANAGEMENT
There's this idea in a number of disciplines called the 80/20 ru le. In retail business, it takes the form of, "20 percent of 
the customers account for 80 percent of the complaints." In criminology, it's, "20 percen t of the crimin als account for 
80 percent of the crime." Or, "20 percent of the research an d design team accounts for 80  percent of the new ideas." 
The numbers are not meant to be literal; it's just a way of stating that causality is not equally distributed in a 
population of causal agents.
I would apply the 80/20 rule to  stress management: 80 percent of the stress reduction is accomplished  with the first 20 
percent of effort . What do I mean by this? Suppose you're a Type-A nightmare, this hostile, curt, tightly wound 
misery to those around you. No number of times that friends and loved ones sit you down, warmly look you in the 
eyes, and then yell at you about your being a pain in the a ss will cause anything to change. No number of doctor visits 
with elevated blood pressure readings are going to make a difference. It's not going to happen until you've decided to 
change, and really decided, not just decided to try to make everyone else stop hassling you over some nonexistent 
problem.
This is an essential truth for mental h ealth professionals—the whole family that's  in therapy is desperately trying to 
get the one individual to make some changes, and nothing is going to happen if all he's doing is staring sullenly at the 
Siggie Freud action figure on the shrink's bookshelf. But once you sincerely want to change, the mere act of making 
an effort can do wonders. Fo r example, clinically depresse d people feel significantly better simply by scheduling a 
first appointment to see a therapist—it m eans they've recognized ther e's a problem, it means they've fought their way 
up through the psychomotor quagmire to actually do something, it means they've turned a corner.
This has obvious relevance for stress management. This sect ion has examined characteristi cs of the most effective 
forms of stress management. But don't get crazed, holding off on do ing something unt il you figure out the perfect 
approach for you. On a certain level, it doesn't matter what management technique you use (beyond it not being 
abusive to those around you). If your special stress reduction tr ick is to stand on a busy str eet corner in a toga reciting 
Teletub-bies monologues, you're going to benefit from that, simply because you've d ecided that making a change is 
enough of a priority that you're willing to say no to all the things that can't be said no to, in
"Is there anyone here who specializes in stress management?"
order to do that Tinkie-Winkie soliloquy. Don't save your stre ss management for the weekend, or for when you're on 
hold on the phone for thirty seconds. Take the time out to do it almost daily. And if you manage that, change has 
become important enough to you that you're already a lot of the way there—maybe not really 80 percent, but at least a 
great start.
A SUMMING UP
So what have we learned?
■ In the face of terrible news beyond  control, beyond pr evention, beyond healing, thos e who are able to find the 
means to deny tend to cope best. Such denial is not only permitted, it may be the only means of sanity; truth and 
mental health often go hand in hand, bu t not necessarily in situat ions like these. In the face of lesser problems, one Page 210 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmshould hope, but protectively and rationally. Find ways to view even the most stressful of situations as holding the 
promise of improvement but do not deny the possibility th at things will not improve. Balance these two opposing 
trends carefully. Hope for the best and let that dominate most of your emotions, but at the same time let one small 
piece of you prepar e for the worst.
■  Those who cope with stress successfully tend to seek control in the face of present stressors but do not try to 
control things that have already come to pass. They do not try to control future events that are uncontrollable and do 
not try to fix things that  are not broken or that are brok en beyond repair. When faced with  the large wall of a stressor, 
it is great if there emerges one singular  solution that makes the wall crumble. But often, a solution instead will be a 
series of footholds of contro l, each one small but still capab le of giving support, that wi ll allow you to scale the wall.
■  It is generally helpful to seek predictable, accurate inform ation. However, such informatio n is not useful if it comes 
too soon or too late, if it is unnecessary, if there is so much information that it is  stressful in and of  itself, or if the 
information is about news far worse than one wants to know.
■  Find that outlet for your frustrations and do it regularly. Make the outlet benign to those around you—one should 
not give ulcers in order to avoid getting them. Read the fine print and the ingredient list on each new form of supposed 
anti-stress salvation, be skeptical of hype, figure out what works for you.
■  It is important to find sources of social affiliation and support. Even in our obsessively individualistic society, most 
of us yearn to feel part of something larger than ourselve s. But one should not mistake true affiliation and support for 
mere socializing. A person can feel vastly lonely in a va st crowd or when faced with  a supposed intimate who has 
proved to be a stranger. Be patient; most of us spend a lifetime learning how to be truly good friends and spouses.
Some of these ideas are encompasse d in Reinhold Niebuhr's famous prayer, adopted by Alcoholics Anonymous:
God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, courage to chan ge the things I can, and wisdom to 
know the difference.
Have the wisdom to pick your battles. And once you have, the flexibility and resiliency of strategies to use in those 
battles is summarized in somethi ng I once heard in a Quaker meeting:
In the face of strong winds, let me be a blade of grass. In the face of strong walls, let me be a gale of wind.
Constantin Brancusi, The Kiss, limestone, 1912.
Sometimes, coping with stress consists of blowing down wall s. But sometimes it consists of being a blade of grass, 
buffeted and bent by the wind but still standing when the wind is long gone.Page 211 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htmStress is not everywhere. Every twinge of dysfunction in our bodies is not a manifestation of stress-related disease. It 
is true that the real world is full of bad things that we can finesse away by altering our outlook and psychological 
makeup, but it is also full of awful things that cannot be el iminated by a change in attitude, no matter how heroically, 
fervently, complexly, or ritualistically we may wish. Once we are actually sick wi th the illness, the fantasy of which 
keeps us anxiously awake at two in the morning, the things th at will save us have little to do with the content of this 
book. Once we have that cardiac arrest , once a tumor has metastasized, once our brain has been badly deprived of 
oxygen, little about our psychological outlook is likely to help. We have entered the realm where someone else—a 
highly trained physician—must use the most high-tech of appropriate medical interventions.
These caveats must be emphasized repeat edly in teaching what cures to seek and what attributio ns to make when 
confronted with many diseases. But am id this caution, there remains a whole realm of health an d disease that is 
sensitive to the quality of our minds—our thoughts and emotions and behaviors. And sometimes whether or not we 
become sick with the diseases th at frighten us at two in the morning will reflect this realm of the mind. It is here that 
we must turn from the physicians and their ability to cl ean up the mess afterward and recognize our own capacity to 
prevent some of these problems beforehand in the small steps with which we live our everyday lives.
Perhaps I'm beginning to sound like your grandmother, advising you to be happy and not to worry so much. This 
advice may sound platitudinous, trivial, or both. But change the way even a rat perceives its world, and you 
dramatically alter the likelihood of its  getting a disease. These ideas are no  mere truisms. They are powerful, 
potentially liberating forces to be harnessed. As a physiologi st who has studied stress for many years, I clearly see that 
the physiology of the system is often no more decisive  than the psychology. We retu rn to the catalogue at the 
beginning of the first chapter, the things we all find stre ssful— traffic jams, money worrie s, overwork, the anxieties of 
relationships. Few of them are "real" in the sense that that zebra or that lion would understand. In our privileged lives, 
we are uniquely smart enough to have invented these stressors and uniquely foolish enough to have let them, too 
often, dominate our lives. Surely we have the potential to  be uniquely wise enough to banish their stressful hold.
THE END
Notes not scanned!Page 212 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm